Modernist literature had been developing for some time when the Great War began in 1914.
It took a fresh outlook on the world and embraced change, its characteristics include a rejection of religion, an appreciation of science and psychoanalysis, a recognition of the inconsistencies and incoherencies in life and new writing styles and structures.
It has been debated whether the war actually initiated the beginning of true modernism, but the war certainly contributed to its development.
It offered a new angle for modernism, providing an insight into the depths of depravity to which humanity could sink - killing on a massive and brutal scale.
It seems important that the Great War is presented in an unforgettable way, and yet such depravity is seemingly unrepresentable.
Language is formed through relating something to experiences we already know, but the Great War seemed to be incomparable.
For some, it took a long time to be able to write directly about it, but writers felt a duty to document the event, to eliminate the euphemisms and clichés  and to find a way to represent the unrepresentable.
Poets and novelists attempted to achieve this seemingly impossible goal in various ways, but this essay attempts to show the basic underlying similarities used in both.
Siegfried Sassoon famously denounced the continuation of war.
His poetry attacked the people that were responsible for its prolongation and those who didn't want to hear or accept its true ghastliness.
He used satire to present an experience he may have found too painful to write about otherwise.
The General is a typical poem of Sassoon's, combining jovial, colloquial language with the grim reality of death.
The final line 'But he did for them both by his plan of attack' puts the blame on those responsible for sending young men into apparently senseless battle.
A similar up-beat rhyming scheme  is used in both The General and Suicide in the Trenches use, working as an ironic contrast to their content.
The latter poemuses shock tactics rather than satire.
'He put a bullet through his brain, no one spoke of him again' is an effective way of shocking the reader into realising the brutality of war.
Once again Sassoon uses the final lines to attack his readers, 'You smug-faced crowds', provoking them into accepting their role in the war, cheering the soldiers on to death.
The unrepresentable is made more comprehensible by Sassoon and others in different forms of literature, such as R.C.Sherriff, the playwright in Journeys End, by the use of colloquialisms.
Sassoon slips these into his poems to highlight how out of touch those in power are with the reality of the common soldier: 'the jolly old rain' appears in Counter-Attack, following a harrowing description of men fighting on a bed of corpses.
Clichés are used to good effect too, exampled in his poem Survivors.
The first line 'No doubt they'll soon get well' contrasts the false hope of supporters of the war with the real fate of the soldiers.
The flippant remark 'Of course they're longing to go out again' shows how those at home were disassociated with the reality of war .
Sassoon ridicules them, using the words 'glorious war' alongside descriptions of haunting nightmares.
He ends the poem on a similar note to Suicide in the Trenches, forcing his readers to take responsibility for the soldiers' pain with his concluding line 'with eyes that hate you'.
Bernard Bergonzi in Heroes' Twilight claims that Sassoon is limited in his style, employing a 'hard, clear, sharply defined' language, rather than something more suggestive .
But Sassoon's strategy for representing the unrepresentable is a style particular to him and he is capable of painting a vivid picture of war and the feelings of soldiers in passages such as this from Counter-Attack: The diverse recording of the Great War means that it is important to look at different writers in order to get an overall picture.
Sassoon befriended the poet Wilfred Owen, who chose to present the war from another angle.
Claiming that 'Above all I am not concerned with poetry... My subject is war and the pity of war' , he sought to present the sufferings of war in such a way that they would never be forgotten and thus serve as a warning to future generations.
Owen represented the unrepresentable by absorbing himself in the emotions of war, and from this his poetic style developed.
In such poems as Strange Meeting he uses assonant endings : 'Now men will go content with what we spoiled.
Or discontent, boil bloody, and be spilled' to give an oppressive quality which enhances the emotion the poem contains.
One of his most effective poems Disabled uses a simple a,b,a,b rhyme scheme and presents the situation of a soldier returning as an amputee.
Like Sassoon, he uses the poem to show the difficulty that people at home had in accepting what happened in the trenches, the cheerful rhyme scheme perhaps implying the falsity of their welcome.
Neither the rhyme scheme nor the people accept the reality that the poem really portrays and it is those at home who are as much 'disabled' as the wounded men they greet .
Owen uses irony to portray the needlessness of such loss, implied in the line 'before he threw away his knees'.
The irony continues as the soldier remembers how he enlisted after a football match, flattered by girls telling him he would look like a 'god in kilts'.
Now he feels bitter that they will only look at him in a maternal manner.
He is emasculated, knowing women will now be the ones to put him to bed whilst before the war he could have expected to take them to bed .
When he says that blood 'spurted from his thigh' he parodies sexual ejaculation, but the irony is in the fact that this equals a loss of life rather than the creation of one.
Owen employs a subtle yet interesting use of colour.
Things are 'dark' and 'grey' and his subject sits in the 'shade', implying that there will no longer be any colour in his life.
Indeed, Owen writes 'He's lost his colour very far from here', showing that the war sucked his life out of him.
Erich Maria Remarque's book All Quiet on the Western Front, like much of Owen's work, has been described as an anti-war document .
Unforgettable for many of its readers, it highlights the main, disturbing elements of war.
Death encompasses everything, causing fear of the future and alienation from the past.
The importance of endurance and friendship is emphasised, along with animalistic behaviour and the horror of the fact that the war was begun and continued by a supposedly compassionate human race.
Everything that is written in the book is recorded for a reason, and it goes a long way to representing the unrepresentable.
Remarque implies that the point at which we stop being human is reached when we lose our autonomy .
As soldiers have no control over their lives they resort to animalistic behaviour in an attempt to survive.
The soldier's priorities change, as they become obsessed with food - fighting over it, hoarding it and gorging on it.
Close attention is paid to bowel activity; a healthy digestive system is vital to survival and soldiers cling to anything that resembles a routine, whether it be their meal times or bowel movements.
These accounts met some criticism when it was first published , but theywere necessary in order to give a vivid and truthful account of war, showing just how far the soldiers are forced to strip back to basics.
The inability of soldiers to readjust to an apparently meaningless world is a difficult idea to portray.
Remarque does it by exploring the way soldiers lose sense of their own humanity, no longer able to connect the present to their past.
Christine R.Barker and R.W.Last  explain how the author displays this when the soldiers joke about their education and its irrelevance to their lives in battle, asking questions that used to seem important, such as 'How many inhabitants has Melbourne?'
.
Once the soldiers enter the army their priorities have to change as they realise that there is no longer a meaningful distinction between good and bad.
Good people are unjustly killed and existence is always due to chance .
When Baumer stabs Duval the reader knows that it is not something he would do in normal circumstances, but it is simply his animal instinct taking hold to ensure survival.
Baumer makes promises to the dying soldier that he will never be able to fulfil, as Remarque portrays the agony Baumer goes through in coming to terms with the 'person' he has become, War literature stresses the importance of friendship and camaraderie, and All Quiet on the Western Front is no different.
Many soldiers, like Baumer, found they could no longer relate to the family and friends at home who couldn't understand the trauma that they had been through.
They became each others mothers and lovers because fellow soldiers were the only ones who understood.
A soldier particularly special to Baumer is Kat.
He represents safety and warmth, 'Kat stands before me, his giant shadow bent over me like home' .
Friends were needed as a distraction from distressing thoughts and Remarque cleverly exhibits this when Baumer becomes trapped in a shell hole with a man he has just stabbed.
The longer Baumer is there with the dying man, the more desperate he becomes as he is forced to be alone with his thoughts 'But every gasp strips my heart bare.
The dying man is the master of these hours, he has an invisible dagger to stab me with: the dagger of time and my own thoughts' .
When he is reunited with his friends he is comforted, 'feeling better because of their presence' .
Friendship could work as a distraction for the soldiers, aiding them in the repression of their troubled memories.
This is a theme that often occurs in war literature, and it is represented in a variety of ways.
In Pat Barker's Regeneration patients are shown to repress their fears and opinions thorugh physical defects, such as mutism and paralysis, and in Rebecca West's Return of the Soldier there is a complex theme of repression, most obvious in the soldier wholoses his memory - erasing recollection of the horrific war.
Representing the imminence of death can only be achieved by bringing the reader face to face with it.
Remarque surrounds his characters with death as they live with it day by day, even hiding in the graves of dead soldiers to avoid death themselves.
Friendship becomes the symbol of life for Baumer, but as his friends die one by one, life slips away.
Remarque tracks the path of death with a pair of boots - as they are passed on to each soldier we know that they are doomed .
The penultimate death comes with Kat, coinciding with the death of Baumer's mother.
To the perceptive reader this signals the end for him, with no future any longer in war or at home.
Once a soldier realises the universal futility of war he can no longer have a meaningful future.
The episode with Duval points to an end for Baumer as it gives a face to the opposition.
Infrequent in war literature, it is insightful as it shows a soldier being forced to come to terms with the fact that he is not just fighting against death, but another human being.
It obliges him to consider the consequences of the atrocities he is forced to commit.
The style of language Remarque employs is deliberate, and the ending's impact is increased by the use of the present tense and staccato sentences.
The stripping down of language reflects the limited, automatic thought process 'I stand up.
I am very calm' as he becomes dissociated with his body .
The short sentences are interspersed with longer ones which help to highlight the words and give them a greater meaning.
It might appear that All Quiet on the Western Front has no purposeful plot, yet Remarque has employed many of the elements of modernist writing to good effect.
As well as the fragmentary style he uses anger, and a sense of being lost after the inevitable rejection of religion.
The idea of events building to a climax in the mind reflect the psychoanalytical ideas that were emerging and the animalistic references could elude to Darwin's recent'survival of the fittest' thesis.
Like Dr Rivers in Pat Barker's Regeneration, Remarque believes that it is not always one horrific event that pushes a soldier over the edge, but a series of incidents that build to a climax in the mind.
Happy and tragic episodes are alternated with increasing intensity  and the contrasts enhance the power of each scene.
Emotions become more fraught and as each chapter ends with either a departure or return the story builds up to Baumer's ultimate departure - death.
Events, such as moving up and down the line, are repeated throughout the story to give a sense of the treadmill of war which wears the soldiers down .
Alienation is enhanced by a growing sense of 'them' and 'us', as the soldiers feel that those running the war don't care about what happens to them.
This is personified in the scenes with Himmelstoss, who deliberately makes their lives a misery.
This can also be seen in work such as Sassoon's, as he too is bitter towards the authorities that continue the war.
Their revenge on Himmelstoss is a form of revenge against the invisible powers that force them to fight a war they no longer believe in.
War is truly a physical experience.
It impacts on all the senses - sight, smell and touch - and if it seems too much for the reader to take in, we must imagine what it was like for the people that actually experienced it.
Poets and novelists like Sassoon and Remarque uses an array of tactics to hammer home their unrepresentable message.
Colloquialism, cliché, irony and shock all play their part.
As a novelist, Remarque mixes documentary and autobiographical styles , giving his book a sense of authenticity and empathy for the lead character.
Its autobiographical quality is a clever trick because although the events in the book point towards Baumer's death, the reader is led to believe he may have a future beyond the war.
The shock we feel when he dies is the greater because of this and gives us a sense of what Baumer must have felt every time he lost a friend, all contributing to Remarque's way of representing the unrepresentable.
The ambiguity of Baumer's death shows that it could have been any soldier, increasing the universality of his experience.
It represents an ambiguity for the future as well as for the identity of all soldiers .
The title All Quiet on the Western Front also represents the insignificance of just one death in war.
Although we cannot assume that the war was the same for everybody, the war poets like Sassoon and Owen and novelists like Remarque lead us to understand that death is the ultimate unrepresentable experience that everybody has to experience, and we must ultimately have to face it alone.
A simplified initial view of Anne Bradshaw's poem 'The Author to Her Book' is that she has a negative view on her poetry.
Within the first few lines of verse, she uses negative words and phrases; "ill-formed", "feeble", "snatched" and "exposed", all of which primarily produce pessimistic connotations.
They could also be considered litotes; the word "feeble" especially.
Bradshaw goes on to describe how editing her writing is a difficult process, "I cast thee by as one unfit for light".
This statement could be considered a continuation of the negative language felt earlier.
To me however, she shows herself to be a highly competent poet, who is prepared to scrutinise her own work in order to achieve the best possible result.
Indeed one could argue that from the moment the poem begins, she personifies her written work, likening it to the birth of a child, "Thou ill formed off-spring from my brain".
Offspring is usually a word to describe something that is positive and special, something to be celebrated.
One could infer therefore that Bradshaw draws attention to the weaknesses of her work in order to highlight its main strengths.
Her modesty allows the reader to engage with the text in a more natural and sympathetic fashion.
I do not feel for example, that the poem would have been as effective had she initially applauded her work.
Bradshaw continues to use negative imagery throughout the rest of the poem.
A hyperbole in line 10 exemplifies this, "Thy visage was so irksome in my sight", drawing further sympathy from the reader.
One might also see a socially contextual allegory in this image of the poem as her 'child'.
As a female writer in the 17 th Century, Bradshaw's literature may not have seemed as widely accepted as that of her male counterparts.
The image of her 'giving birth' to this writing celebrates motherhood and outlines the importance of female contribution to literature at the time.
Her choice of masculine rhyme is probably to make her poem sound manlier, and enable her work to be more accepted amongst both genders.
The poem is a 24-line verse, formed in regular iambic pentameter.
The use of rhyming couplets adds a light tone, making poem easy to read.
The 'fun' rhyme of the poem further supports the fact that Bradshaw is in-fact celebrative of her work.
There are however, a few anomalies; in lines 19-22, Bradshaw does not use the expected rhyme scheme of J, J, K, K. Instead she alternates between J and K and uses half-rhyme.
This would perhaps strengthen the content of these lines though, as the poet talks of "roam" and "find" - general feelings of disorientation.
Here the rhyme scheme is itself 'disorientated'.
One sees interesting parallels with the work of Seamus Heaney in his poem 'Digging'.
Both poets take themselves and the reader on a journey of self-identification, and begin to question their work or profession.
Both relate to their families, and use figurative language to help describe their thoughts or inspirations.
Heaney's thoughts are considered to be 'good turf'.
It is also interesting to see how both poems begin with a fairly negative tone, but reach the conclusion that they are proud of their work as poets.
In the exploration of punishment in Greek tragedy, the targeted characters are ones of power; kings and the divine with the authority to administrate punishment to the guilty.
Guilt commonly follows crime or sin and the level of justice in the given punishment must be assessed.
For example, while a punishment is directed at a single person, it often affects the lives of many, which increases the severity of this penalty.
The level of justice will assess the ability of people in power to make judgement and decisions.
Euripides' Bacchae and Sophocles' Antigone display the capability of both man and the divine to error but the consistency lies in the authority of the gods.
While man can be judged, the gods are the highest level of authority and are therefore able to design an image of justice that cannot be challenged by man.
These are both fierce and bloody plays that do not attempt to disguise the conflicts between men, in the case of Antigone, while the dissonance lies between god and men in Euripides' tragedy.
Euripides introduces the gods as brutal and vengeful figures in the opening of this play through Dionysus' explanation of his birth: Dionysus is keen to publicise the truth of his parentage to the doubting city of Thebes in order to establish himself as a new Olympian god who is worthy of their worship and praise.
He believes that he is the son of the most powerful of all gods, Jove, who had an affair with Semele, Cadmus' mortal daughter.
Dionysus implies a precarious birth which he later explains as the product of 'Herè's immortal vengeance'  against his mother.
Many sources agree that Dionysus was the product of two mothers as, provoked by Herè, Jove revealed himself to pregnant Semele who was struck down by the sight of the divine figure that mortals cannot endure.
Euripides suggests that while Herè's jealousy enraged the action, Jove's fury was the guilty, catalytic power that 'Struck dead the bold usurper of his bed' , forcing him to bear Dionysus in his thigh to save him.
By blaming Jove for Semele's death, Euripides attaches a brutality, ruthlessness and disregard for human life to this god that will be echoed by his son during the play.
This account warns of the inharmonious relations often found between humans and the divine and emphasises the superior power of the gods over mortals through divine intervention.
Bacchus continues to prepare the audience for the tragic drama they should expect to unfold by emphasising his intentions in visiting Thebes: Bacchus' intentions are wholly destructive, directing a play which, 'rather than a cautionary tale, is a vision of total despair'.
He doesn't only wish to convince the city of his power but intends to inflict a gruesome punishment on the people for their sinful behaviour and instigate fear in them like their fears of any divine authority.
The target of Dionysus' vengeance is collective as he believes that each and every citizen is guilty of persecuting him, rejecting his name in holy prayer and denying him as a god.
Dionysus' first stage in his intricate plan of vengeance targets the women of Thebes who, possessed by their malicious leader, have been forced from their homes and reunited with the raw landscape where they perform Bacchic rituals involving dancing in bare feet and sacrificing animals.
Their harmony with the bare mountains and the beasts erodes the barriers between humans and the natural world, portraying the women as wild, savage and uncivilised.
Their transformation into maenads pollutes the rational, innocuous order of the Theban lifestyle.
Diller describes the effect of the injection of Bacchanals into Greece as 'the colourful intermingling of wild ecstasy with calm tranquillity, of every day life with unaccustomed events' which 'constitutes both its attraction and danger'.
The attraction of the Bacchic culture lies in its devotion to liberation but this detachment from the rigidity of the civil order infuses a dangerous chaos within the city.
As the embodiment of customary political authority, Pentheus immediately perceives Dionysus as a threat to his city and spurns the 'womanly man' who has infected Thebes with 'a new disease'  that he is determined to control.
As the leading representative of Thebes, it is inevitable that Pentheus will receive the greatest impact of Dionysus' punishment.
However, he further attracts the angry god's vengeance by ignoring the advice of Tiresias and Cadmus who think it wise to demonstrate an outward recognition of the god even if 'he were no god' .
Although these elderly citizens follow their own advice, this does not allow them exemption from Dionysus' cruel retribution.
In particular, Cadmus is heavily affected as he is exiled from the race he established and the murder of his grandson terminates the future of his family.
While these facts highlight the merciless nature of Bacchus who is quick to cut down anyone who doesn't immediately praise him, it is possible that this god refuses to save these individuals as he can see through their pretence.
Cadmus admits personal motives behind his Bacchic celebration.
He is concerned for his treatment by the gods in death that he fears is soon approaching and is delighted that his daughter is believed to have given birth to an immortal: Considering Bacchus' treatment of Cadmus and Tiresias, there is no guarantee that, had Pentheus reacted differently to his intrusion, he would have been saved from the wrath of the unforgiving god.
However, by actively opposing this force, Pentheus commences a heavily imbalanced war with the divine that originates from his desire to defend himself and his city from something he fails to comprehend: Furthermore, he is outraged that someone should have the effrontery to undermine his authority over the city that he governs.
Pentheus allows his anger to inspire a foolish hubris in him which guides his sense and judgment to a fight with the inevitable.
Diller perceives that the winner of this fight will be dependent on who has the greatest measure of sophia which denotes 'the grasping of a situation or task and the ability to master it'.
While Pentheus arrogantly believes he has a clear understanding of how to overcome the threat of Dionysus, Bacchus is realistically confident he will effortlessly triumph over his enemy .
Cadmus demonstrates the dreadful consequences of challenging an immortal through an account of the tragedy of Actaeon who claimed to be more skilful in hunting than Artemis.
He reports an equally brutal punishment to that Pentheus painfully experiences at the end of this play; he was 'rent in wrath to pieces' .
Pentheus' intentions are purely theomachein  but he is utterly blinded by his pride.
In pursuit of conflict with a god, Pentheus is described as 'crazed' and 'at the height of madness'  by Tiresias who is frequently portrayed as the voice of wisdom and rationality.
Dionysus and his foreign cultures have been condemned with similar descriptions throughout this play by both the chorus and Pentheus himself.
Their irrational behaviour is just one of the numerous similarities these characters share: Johnston implies that Pentheus' conflict with his cousin forms from a rejection of Bacchus as a member of his family as well as a divine figure.
Following his capture of the women of Thebes, the object of Dionysus' punishment becomes narrowly focused on the individual, Pentheus.
Firstly, Euripides creates dramatic irony by fooling the king into believing he is only a follower of Dionysus, rather than the god himself.
He then further ridicules him by encouraging him to wear women's clothes after creating an earthquake that shatters Thebes to ruins.
The peak of Dionysus' cruelty is in his design of Pentheus' death where the immortal delivers a double blow; not only is Pentheus killed by his citizens possessed by his enemy but his very own mother.
Pentheus' last words before his death form a desperate plea to his mother to return to her senses and recognise him as her son: Euripides conforms to a popular convention of Greek theatre by verbalising Pentheus' death through the narration of the messenger, rather than designing this tragedy to be visualised on the stage.
While the complexity of this particularly bloody scene would have been the primary motive in the playwright's methods, simply an aural account of the action allows the audience to use their imagination which often feels more realistic and dramatic than simply a presentation of reality.
Pentheus shows a failure to recognise the extent to which he is responsible for his own fall, expressing no guilt or regret.
Therefore, it is difficult to perceive Pentheus as the tragic hero of this tale as he does not have the opportunity to reflect upon his actions.
However, Schechner describes the actions of Agave, who, it can be argued, adopts the role of tragic hero in her brief but essential presence in the play: It is not unreasonable to suggest that Agave is delivered the most severe punishment by Dionysus in this play as she performs unforgivable sins outside of her control.
She then continues to inspire the audience's pathos by unconsciously expressing her delirium following her lethal actions.
Most importantly, she is returned to consciousness to suffer the process of anagnorisis when she discovers the harsh reality of her hunt.
While Pentheus suffers bodily torture, Agave experiences a mental agony that will be intrinsic to her being for the duration of her life.
Diller suggests that the audience can particularly sympathise with Agave because, unlike her son, 'we learn nothing of her resistance' .
Her punishment is not terminated there either as Dionysus then thinks it appropriate to exile her and her family from Thebes.
This is where the severity of this god is put into question as the audience is provoked to consider what kind of justice is administered here.
Dionysus provides the people with a single warning in the play, towards Pentheus by advising him not to attempt to defeat this god.
This is the only trace of mercy offered by this god who perceives his victory as a god in the devastation of a city and its people.
Euripides displays a version of divine justice that breeches on insanity, greatly accentuated by the pleasure this god takes in wreaking his rage.
In Sophocles' Antigone, Creon plays the role of an equally proud, power-driven king who allows these ambitious discrepancies to misguide his character towards a catastrophic error of judgement.
In this drama, the brutality of the gods seen in the Bacchae is transferred to the humans who are shown to be just as capable of bitter vengeance.
However, Creon demonstrates tremendous guilt and regret for his merciless actions, highlighting the essential difference between gods and mortals; mortals are human, who sin and evaluate their actions with a conscience that does not allow them defence against lamentation.
When both heirs to the Theban throne are killed in battle, Creon feels inclined to establish his new authority as king with a merciless command to deny Polynices his burial following his traitorous actions to his fatherland.
Creon invades the territory of the gods by rejecting an unwritten law that a dead body must be buried in order to be passed into the underworld.
The king ambitiously attempts to overrule the authority of the gods who, he believes, are sure to support him in this decision as they are gods of the city who would not 'celebrate traitors'.
However, Antigone correctly believes that the gods would fully encourage her actions and thinks Creon deluded to suppose that 'a mere mortal, could override the gods, / the great unwritten, unshakeable traditions' .
Kitto suggests that Antigone 'is working with the gods, and the gods are working in her - exactly as Aphrodite, later, works in Haemon against Creon'.
While there are no immortal characters in this play, divine justice is alternatively demonstrated in the actions of characters, including Antigone and Haemon but particularly in the warnings of Tiresias.
The seer complains that the 'the public altars and sacred hearths are fouled'  with the carrion torn from the unburied corpse.
He warns the proud king that the gods cannot possibly support this disrespect to their places of worship.
More importantly, Creon has 'robbed the gods'  of a child of the earth and this injustice will only be resolved by surrendering a child of his own to them.
While Creon is the leading power of Thebes, his decisions are also judged by the gods whose greater power allows them to justly punish the king.
Creon exhibits a hunger for cruelty in this play that increases in severity the more his pride and authority is challenged.
In the king's opening speech he introduces his pitiless character by graphically describing his intentions for Polynices' corpse; that it become 'carrion for the birds and dogs to tear'.
Creon understands that his law completely disrespects Polynices and his family but his concerns lie with the state.
Knox reminds the contemporary audience of the common Greek reaction to Creon's punishment: While the explicit description is unnecessary, Creon's actions are not thoroughly irrational at this point.
He demonstrates an unwavering dedication to the state in his promise of death to anyone who acts against the interests of Thebes by disobeying his law.
However, when it is revealed that his law has been violated, he is outraged that somebody should have the nerve to undermine his authority and his pride guides him to irrationality.
He is determined that someone should suffer the punishment of death, regardless of whether they are guilty.
He threatens his sentries with death for failing to seek out the culprit and Antigone's misfortune becomes their fortune when she is caught.
When the king is challenged by Antigone, he cannot bear that a woman should mock his authority and promises her 'the most barbaric death' .
Ismene indicates that killing Antigone would severely punish his son, Haemon, who is lovingly devoted to her, but Creon does not at all intend to reconsider his decision.
However, when Haemon appeals to Creon, it becomes clear that rejecting his son's wishes is more than a rejection of the interests of his family over the state.
This interaction between father and son is very revealing of the king's motives in the deliverance of his punishment.
Haemon intelligently begins a plea to his father by feeding his ego with praise, declaring that he is subordinate to his father in everyway and he will never hesitate to obey his word.
Unsurprisingly, Creon thoroughly delights in these compliments until Haemon indicates his support for Antigone.
Rather than asking Creon for mercy based on his personal interests, Haemon relates the grief of the city who wholly sympathise with Antigone as they believe she has acted gloriously.
At this point, Creon proves the instability of his devotion to the state by expressing 'The city is the king's - that's the law!'
.
The king is determined not to expose any weakness by altering his decision on the words of others, which he considers to be secondary to his own.
Whether his actions are supported by the city is of no interest to this leader who solely perseveres to establish his authority over the city.
Creon seems to believe that the greater the punishment, the greater the fear, inspiring him to kill Antigone in front of his son's eyes.
While Creon's intentions are utterly inhumane, he is certainly not the only character in this play who is guilty of irrationality.
Antigone rashly decides to disobey Creon's command in the understanding that she will be punished with death.
Kitto outlines Antigone's reasons for her rebellion as 'loyalty to her family, love of her brother, religious duty' and 'sheer physical and emotional revulsion against the horror' .
Antigone is single-minded, wilful and passionate, disallowing her to consider the sense in her sister's reasoned argument.
Instead, she shames Ismene by condemning her for acting selfishly and betraying the interests of her family for the law of Creon.
She provokes her into guilt by no longer referring to Polynices as 'our brother' but 'my brother'  and condemning her dishonour of the gods.
Although Creon's punishment extends to a loss of marriage and children for Antigone, she shows little regret throughout the play, but rather an acceptance of the consequences of supporting her brother.
When Creon finally regrets his decision and sees reason, it is too late for Antigone who, 'independent to the last, has chosen her own way to die'.
Unlike Dionysus, Creon both receives and delivers punishment in this play as he is subordinated by the omniscient gods.
His decision to abandon Polynices' body to the elements punished Antigone's family.
and indirectly destroyed his own.
He deservedly receives a twofold punishment in the loss of his son and wife in the final scenes of Antigone.
Knox discusses the suitability of this punishment: Creon, like Thebes in the Bacchae, has painfully learnt a humbling lesson.
This lesson encompasses the importance of using wisdom, of finding a balance of reverence to the gods and controlling pride.
This lesson could similarly be applied to Pentheus whose lack of wisdom and pride leads him to the inevitable task of challenging the gods.
While man is blamed for the tragic consequences of Antigone, Euripides has been considered as 'a critic of the Olympian gods' , suggesting that this play condemns the actions of irrational Dionysus.
Both plays adopt the idea that, without rationality, power can be a dangerous thing to possess, both among humans and the divine.
In his provincial novel The Woodlanders  Thomas Hardy, as the omniscient narrator, remarks: This excerpt demonstrates the symbolic use of nature and landscape to convey the social, political and scientific upheavals that occurred within Queen Victoria's extensive reign from 1837 to 1901.
The proliferation of scientific material, notably Charles Darwin's The Origin of the Species , the periodic economic depression inflicted by the Corn Laws passed in 1815 that resulted in starvation and depraved living conditions as highlighted in Freidrich Engels The Condition of the Working Class in England  and the passing of the Reform Act in 1832, allowing the industrial middle class to vote, created a deep-rooted instability that was reflected in the themes covered by Victorian regional novelists.
As highlighted in the above quotation, these were themes of Darwinism, class conflict, nostalgia for lost community and even divergence among the sexes.
By employing landscape and symbolic geography Victorian novelists were able to express these developments and changes in individuals and communities.
Interestingly, each of the novelists wrote at different periods of the Victorian era, therefore I will examine Elisabeth Gaskell's portrayal of Manchester, during the 'hungry forties,' in her industrial novel North and South , the 'golden age' bucolic pastoral East Midlands of George Eliot's Silas Marner ), and explore Thomas Hardy's Wessex in Tess of the D'Urbervilles  and The Woodlanders  First then, I will examine the novelists' use of landscape to explore the conflicts that existed between different social classes.
As Enid Duthie highlights in the fiction of Elizabeth Gaskell "landscapes...are inseparably connected with the lives of her characters."
Indeed Margaret Hale embodies the unbreakable link between southern prosperity and northern misery that comprises the broader theme of class conflict in Gaskell's North and South.
Freidrich Engels portrayal of working class Manchester filled with "the heaps of debris refuse...and standing pools for gutters [which] would make it impossible for a human being in any degree civilised to live in such a district" highlights this working class misery.
The second chapter entitled 'Roses and Thorns' is symbolic then of the social divide between the 'golden stillness' of Helstone and the 'purpose-like' and 'hopeless' streets of Milton.
The significance of this title is emphasised at the conclusion of the novel, when Thornton shows Margaret the roses he brought from Helstone, perhaps a symbol representing the union between North and South and the social classes they embody.
In contrast, the riot of angry mill workers who mob Thornton's home, is an obvious motion of conflict.
Gaskell relates the 'fierce unearthly groan' they emit, filled with the 'demonic desire of some terrible wild beast for the food that is withheld from his ravening."
This animalistic imagery equates the mill workers with nature, thus presenting Thornton's behaviour as unnatural.
Similarly, the mutiny that occurred upon Frederick's ship is perhaps a direct reflection of this riot between Thornton and the mill workers and Gaskell's reminder that conflict between the classes was universal, irrelevant of location or landscape.
Certainly, Gaskell wishes to emphasise the unnaturalness of Milton due to its removal from nature.
Margaret mistakenly concludes the screen of cloud, which she 'had taken to foretell rain' is in fact 'black, un-parlimentary, smoke."
This motif is explored further when Thornton abolishes the autonomy of his workers by referring to them as 'hands,' via metonymical classification and patronises them by employing the father-child metaphor, that 'masters would like their hands to be merely tall, large, children...with a blind unreasoning kind of obedience,' used by paternalists during the era, to define his relationship with his mill workers.
Similar to Thornton's work ethic is Silas Marner's love of money and material possessions that symbolise the destructive nature of industrialisation.
George Levine states that in "George Eliot's realism the details reverberate with significance and the images are as much a part of the consciousness of the characters as representations of material reality."
His obsession with counting money whose 'form and colour were like the satisfaction of thirst to him' and attachment to 'the brown pot' he breaks are symbolic of industrialisations consciousness of capitalism.
Significantly, its poisoning effects are mirrored in Silas' mental degradation in the form of 'catalepsy' fits.
Like Thornton, Silas must fight this individual desire in favour of a moral responsibility to Eppie.
Thomas Hardy created many memorable heroines, but the most intricate of his characters was Wessex, his "partly - real, partly-dream country" as he described it in the preface to Far from the Madding Crowd  Originally a south-western region of Britain ruled by the Saxons, Hardy clearly wanted to evoke connotations of antiquity, essentially though Wessex has come to embody an entire culture that is predominately rural and pre-industrial.
Like Margaret Hale in Eliot's North and South, Grace in The Woodlanders embodies the class conflict; she 'combined modern nerves with primitive feelings."
The cruelty of nature in which 'stoats' suck ' the blood of the rabbits' and 'etiolated arms of ivy...grope in vain for some support' reflects these conflicts.
"Grace then is the pivotal figure, who has to choose between town civilisation and country life in choosing between Fitzpiers and Giles."
Grace compares Fitzpiers presence in Little Hintock, to like finding ' a tropical plant in a hedgerow."
Whilst, Mr Melbury is listening to the drunken Fitzpiers criticisms of his family, the trees take on the appearance of 'sentinels...pikes...lances' in reflection of Mr Melbury's violent thoughts.
These instances show that "the trees, whether viewed as subjects or as objects, are the medium through which the community lives and expresses itself."
The gardens of Mrs Charmond's Hintock House, in The Woodlanders, are essentially man-made with nature being restricted to only 'an old tree here and there' and 'an endless shearing of the heavy armed ivy...and a continual lopping of trees and shrubs."
Similarly, Fitzpiers' garden is 'so regular in [its] plan that they might have been laid out by a Dutch designer of the time."
These images are in direct contrast with Giles' home within the forest and symbolic of the class conflict.
Often the theme of depicting conflict between the classes is addressed by the authors extending the boundaries of landscape into the interior landscape within the homes of individual characters.
Margaret's aunt's residence at Harley Street that is filled with lavish fabrics of 'white muslin' and 'crimson damask sofa[s],' lies in stark contrast to the home of Bessy and Nicholas Higgins among 'the crowded narrow streets' of Milton.
In George Eliot's Silas Marner  the Red house belonging to the Cass' is an eyesore among the traditional cottages and firmly establishes the division of classes, for when Godrey meets a local 'there was no pleasant morning greeting between them...because the sweet flower of courtesy is not a growth of such homes as the Red house."
Hardy effectively establishes correspondence between location and the quality's they denote about the types of community who inhabit them.
Alec's home is 'a fancy farm' made from modern brick a 'rich red colour' in stark contrast to the surrounding green 'fertile and sheltered' land of Marlott, where Tess is from.
Not only is his modern dwelling in conflict with the traditional homes in the Vale of Blackmoor, but it is 'built for enjoyment pure and simple' and it's intrusion upon the landscape signals Alec penetration of Tess.
Sandbourne is an 'exotic' and 'fashionable watering-place,' 'a Mediterranean lounging - place on the English Channel' entirely in conflict with the surrounding countryside and symbolic of the social divide between the aristocracy and rural artisan class.
In The Woodlanders Mrs Charmond's living room at Hintock House is filled with 'showy Versaillese furniture,' 'a red-shaded lamp' all in a 'style unlike that of the structural parts of the building as it was possible to be."
Even the urban interloper Fitzpiers acknowledges that 'the window curtains were closed' because it was raining.
Mrs Charmond is literally trying to shut herself off from nature.
Her abode is in direct contrast to the bustling, functional home of Mr Melbury that is a higgledy assortment 'of all sorts of buildings' In further contrast, is the room that functions as 'kitchen, parlour, and bed chamber all in one' belonging to Giles Winterborne.
The discrepancies between the three homes only serve to embellish the divide between rich and poor.
Issues of class conflict are often concurrent with conflicts between the sexes.
Gaskell originally entitled the novel 'Margaret Hale' but after pressure from her editor Charles Dickens, she was encouraged to change it to North and South, because it was thought to be more 'expressive of the opposite people brought face to face by the story."
These events mirror Margaret Hales struggle to maintain autonomy, for just as Charles Dickens realised, so too does Patricia Ingham, that Margaret is 'a middle class woman with the agency and sexuality [to] throw into question the dominant ideologies of gender and therefore class."
Indeed, the violent imagery depicted at the riot between Thornton and the mill workers is equally matched by Margaret's brutal decline of Thornton's marriage proposal, with sexual desire figured as physical violence, when she delivers 'a sound blow with her fists."
Alternatively, the pathetic fallacy Gaskell employs within the title of chapter thirteen; 'A soft breeze is a sultry place,' is subtly laced with sexual connotations denoting the growing romance between Thornton and Margaret.
Interestingly, in Silas Marner it is the lack of a female mother figure,  which is often equated with nature, that results in selfish behaviour in conflict with community ideals.
In Hardy's Tess of the D'Urbervilles Tess is portrayed as an emblem of nature with 'a flower-like mouth' similar to a 'peony,' she is 'a fresh and virginal daughter of Nature."
Alec's rape of her then almost constitutes an assault upon the body of the rural peasant class to which she belongs.
However, "Romantic ideologies upholding natures 'holy plan' clash with a Darwinian notion of nature's randomness and cruelty" for during her rape the ' gentle roosting birds' and 'primeval yews an oaks' look on undisturbed.
Similarly, during her courtship with Angel at Talbothay's Dairy they walk through an 'uncultivated' garden filled with 'rank' and 'offensive' smells.
These 'sticky blights' 'stain' her skin.
Although the imagery is symbolic of the biblical Garden of Eden, I also feel that Hardy's descriptions of nature carry sinister undertones that perhaps signal Angel's abandonment of her in the future.
Unlike Eliot's preference for Wordsworthian realism, Hardy favours the idea of 'negative capability' as promoted by Keats, who urged readers to stop 'reaching after fact and reason' and be 'content with half knowledge."
This explains Hardy's employment of several motifs in Tess of the D'Urbervilles to communicate conflict between the sexes.
The colour red can be traced throughout the novel, particularly when the rose Alec has given Tess 'pricked her chin' and draws blood, prophesising Tess' loss of virginity and Alec's mastery over her.
Later, a 'scarlet blot' of blood on the ceiling signals Tess' murder of Alec and the final assertion of her will over Alec.
Hardy also employs the motif of the sun to mirror Tess' state of mind and the effect of Alec's mastery over her.
Before her rape she has 'a private little sun for her soul to bask in,' however after the rape the suns rays are 'ungenial and peering."
Throughout her courtship with Angel the 'sun itself was hidden' and sits 'like a great inflamed wound in the sky."
Until finally after the murder of Alec, her sense of freedom is accompanied by 'a shaft of dazzling sunlight."
In The Woodlanders Hardy employs similar techniques to those he used in Tess of the D'Urbervilles to highlight tension between the sexes.
I concur with Enid Duthie , who feels "certain types of landscape tend to become associated with certain patterns of feeling and action."
Open commons and fields are often the sphere of action and Fitzpiers affair with Suke Damson occurs because on 'open ground she had placed herself at his mercy."
In contrast, Hardy's uses rain with pornographic intent to symbolise Fitzpiers lust for Grace, which increases until 'it is wetting [her] dress.'
For Grace, the forest takes on a gothic transformation with the 'half-dead oak, hollow, and disfigured with white tumours' during Fitzpiers' affair with Mrs Charmond and, like Tess, she is left hypnotised by Fitzpiers' mastery over her, as mirrored in the landscape of 'the outbuildings, the garden [all of which] wore that aspect of mesmeric passivity."
Mr Melbury's treatment of his daughter can be compared to the wood used to make walking sticks, which has been moulded 'as the Chinese have been said to mould human beings into grotesque toys by continued compression in infancy."
During Graces' relationship with Giles, Hardy employs the pathetic fallacy of 'fog' to mirror Grace's mental confusion about her feelings.
Indeed, their separation is so unnatural 'that the morning could not penetrate the trees."
In, contrast we are reminded of the unnaturalness of her union to Fitzpiers captured in the out-of-season strawberry beds in his garden, that echo those grown by Alec in 'glasshouses' in Tess of the D'Urbervilles.
This aberrant union is emphasised again through the ill omen of 'the falling mixture of rain and snow."
Finally, during the bark stripping Marty is 'encaged amid the mass of twigs and buds like a great bird.'
She is confined to her artisan class and will never gain the education needed to win Giles Winterborne's heart.
The use of landscape was an ideal vehicle through which to explore the recent implications of Darwinism upon community.
Although Gaskell's North and South  was published prior to the publication of Charles Darwin's Origin of the Species  theories of evolution and natural selection had already been hinted at in Lamarck's Philosophie Zooloqiue  and Malthus' Essay on Population  Accordingly, Gaskell effectively highlights this 'struggle for existence' between Thornton and his mill workers, who 'jostled each other aside in the Mart... as they did in life, in the deep selfishness of competition."
Those characters that exist outside the norm of community are ignored, like Thornton's 'weak' sister Fanny, or silenced by nature through death, like John Boucher who drowns 'i' th' brook."
Similarly, Margaret discourages Nicholas Higgins from leaving Milton to find work in the South because she knows the change in landscape, away from his community would 'eat [him] away like rust."
Even Thornton eventually realises that the survival of his mill rests upon group solidarity, so he builds a 'dining-room' believing there is 'nothing like the act of eating for equalising men."
Correspondingly, in Eliot's 'parable' Silas Marner Eppie acts as Silas' salvation by 'link[ing] him once more with the whole world' and the skeleton of Dunstan Cass, who worked against the community and its ideals, is found dead in 'the stone-pit' and thus returned to his native soil.
In Hardy's work, Merryn Williams remarks "industrialism can certainly be brutal but so can nature."
Tess' discovery of the pheasants that have been shot and whose 'rich plumage [were] dabbled with blood' is a violent re-enactment of Tess' rape.
Tess eventually faces death because she exists outside the community and such transgressors will not survive according to Darwinism.
With echoes of William Shakespeare's King Lear Hardy sees Tess ' like a fly on a billiard table of indefinite length, and of no more consequence to the surroundings than that fly' and similarly with echoes of Macbeth 'men every one of whom walked in his own individual way the road to dusty death."
His final reminder that 'the pale and blasted nettle-stems of the preceding year even now lingered nakedly in the banks, young green nettles of the present spring growing up from their roots,' seems to promote the survival of the species.
However, by nominating Angel and Liza Lu as the progenitors of the species Hardy deprives the reader of a cathartic closure.
Compared to Milton's epic Paradise Lost whose Adam and Eve depart with 'paradise within,' Angel and Liza Lu leave a lasting image of a shrunken humanity.
In The Woodlanders passages highlighting the struggle for survival in the forest, where 'two overcrowded branches in the neighbouring wood... were rubbing each other into wounds' and 'wrestling for existence,' are interwoven throughout the text.
By planting trees Giles and Marty are working to preserve 'the soft musical breathing' of the trees that will not be felled until 'long after the two planters had been felled themselves."
Such images promote the survival of the species, instead of the individual.
With Darwinian influences on group solidarity assuring survival, Victorian society began to experience feelings of nostalgia for rural communities that were quickly becoming consumed by industrialisation.
Margaret herself leaves rural Helstone and even though she once 'took pride in her forest' and 'its people were her people' she becomes 'native' to industrial Milton.
Her garden at Helstone, in which 'everything [is] falling and fading, and turning to decay,'  reflects the destiny of this rural community.
This destiny is realised upon Margaret's return.
She notices that familiar landmarks like, the 'squatters roughly-built and decaying cottage had disappeared' and 'old trees had been felled."
The new instated Vicar has already put in 'new grates...and a plate-glass window' into Margaret's old home.
Gaskell's novel is a bildungsroman of Margaret's journey from innocence to experience, however, I feel that the fate of the countryside follows the same path, 'a great improvement it was called; but Margaret sighed over the old picturesqueness, the old gloom, and the grassy wayside of former days."
This nostalgia becomes particularly poignant when we realise that "Elizabeth Gaskell's own predicament was partly that of Margaret Hale.
She was a country lover inescapably committed to making her home in Manchester."
Unlike other novelists of the genre Eliot's rural communities, like Raveloe in Silas Marner, exhibit resilience.
"She presented an idealised social order and way of life ...in memorial to a unified national past."
She relates that 'Raveloe was a village where many of the old echoes lingered, undrowned by new voices."
The conversion of the stone pit into a garden is testament to the enduring spirit of this bucolic pastoral world and the marriage of Eppie and Aaron consolidates the community.
In contrast, at the end of the novella, Silas discovers that Lantern Yard monastery has 'gone.'
An admirer of J.M.W.
Turner's impressionist paintings, Hardy's vast set-piece descriptions of Wessex are breathtaking in their 'painterly' detail and help evoke a sense of nostalgia for the fading rural traditions.
Tess' innocence establish her as a totem for the dying rural community experiencing the 'ache of modernism', especially when contrasted with the onset of industrialisation embodied in the steam train, which with its 'gleaming cranks and wheels' looks 'foreign' next to Tess and the 'red tyrant' threshing machine used at Flintcomb - Ash.
The engineer who drives the machine is described as 'as creature from Tophet' and although 'he was in the agricultural world [he was] not of it."
Yet in Merryn William opinion Hardy "shows no consistent hatred of machinery" instead he exposes the reader to the multitude of conflicting impressions, which he himself felt.
Like Tess' family, Giles Winterborne, in The Woodlanders loses his property to Mrs Charmond and her belief that 'it is of rather more importance to know what the man is himself than what his family is' negates the importance of community.
Grace is aware of a climate of change, when looking up to the sky she ponders on the 'new worlds being cast' and when out walking with her father she encounters the hunt master, who is a stranger and speaks to her in a gruff manner unlike the familiar tones of the community.
In another encounter with a squirrel, father and daughter notice that it ' did not run up its trees, but...cried chut chut chut and stamped with its hind legs on the ground,' behaviour that symbolises that nature is no longer in harmony.
Even Sherton Castle, the home of Fitzpiers ancestors, is in 'ruins.'
The novel appears to end on a note of defeat.
The community seems to passively accept those urban interlopers; Fitzpiers and Mrs Charmond who invade their bucolic pastoral world and nature fails to exert itself.
In conclusion, analysis of Gaskell, Hardy and Eliot's use of symbolic geography and landscape as an analogy to explore the themes of class conflict, Darwinism, loss of community and differences between the sexes, has shown that despite the lapse of time between each of the authors work and the varied social settings, they all adopted the nature and landscape leitmotifs as a vehicle to make a wider social comment, ultimately expressing the often-conflicting demands of the individual and the community at a time of accelerating social change.
In George Orwell's essay Politics and the English Language he describes his concern for the state of the English language and sees politics as a key reason for its decline.
He discusses how political language is invented in order to separate its meaning from its declaration.
He claims political language "is designed to make lies sound truthful and murder respectable, and to give an appearance of solidity to pure wind."
The dictators of the twentieth century carried out such atrocities that it was fundamental that they were able to downplay their actions when justifying their behaviour.
Use of euphemism was common as words such as "pacification", "transfer of population" and "elimination of unreliable elements" were given to explain military practice that governments did not want people to imagine.
In Orwell's writing he studies how language is power.
An oppressive state seeks to abolish liberty, freedom and individuality and the most effective way of doing this is through the control of language.
As accurate history is fundamental to liberty and language dictates history, one can destroy liberty through the control of language.
Orwell was interested in how much more effective it is to alter a persons thinking in accordance with yours than to simply force them to comply by using force.
Orwell noticed how much through the perversion, manipulation and distortion of language, power could be attained and executed in a society.
Animal Farm  is Orwell's satire on how absolute power corrupts.
Orwell said that his moment of epiphany was when in Spain he saw a young boy hitting a carthorse with a stick, the horse's lack of knowledge rendered it a servant as it did not realise its own power.
Power is not simply attained by force, but by knowledge and the oppression of others.
In the novel, power is established through speech, which is the overflow of knowledge, which is gained through education.
This cycle is carried out by the pigs, which are the cleverest of the animals.
They have the ability to read and write and therefore they have access to power.
The old Major is the first animal to show this.
He invents and prophesies the animal rebellion, writes the seven commandments and teaches the animals the pro-animal revolutionary song 'Beasts of England'.
This is the first time a non-human has exorcised power and the other animals revere him.
His commandments are written up on the wall, and this clarification and representation of language is treated as absolute truth, for the other animals cannot write.
The song comes to represent a collective consciousness for the animals as it becomes entwined in their identities, creating a sense of powerful togetherness.
They sing it frequently to celebrate their rebellion as it represents their freedom, liberty and triumph.
After the overthrow of human leadership of the farm, the pigs, especially Snowball and Napoleon, lead the animals together.
Snowball is educated, using his findings from a book on Julius Caesar to help the animals win the Battle of the Cowshed.
He is also a great speaker, often gaining majority support through his impressive speeches.
The other animals are so taken in by the powerful language that in a debate between Snowball and Napoleon they "always found themselves in agreement with the one who was speaking at the moment."
Napoleon realises Snowball's power and he sees his inability to match it.
He initially tries to stop it by teaching the sheep to bleat during Snowball's speeches.
Yet this method only works momentarily and Napoleon concludes that the only way to defeat him is to use violence.
As the dictatorship emerges on the farm the majority of the animals are left completely helpless, for they have no educated language and therefore no expression.
When they witness Napoleon's cruelty towards Snowball "several of them would have protested if they could have found the right arguments."
Instead, they must step back and watch, as they fear the brute force of the bloodthirsty dogs.
Under Napoleon's headship there is no longer education for animals that are not pigs and they become naïve victims of the manipulative educated, unable to articulate their queries or express their thoughts.
The individuals lose their sense of self as they are scared of rebelling against what is the rebellion and therefore they feel it must be the life that they rebelled in order to have.
Even the limited language that they do have is used against them, Boxer's maxims of "I will work harder" and "Comrade Napoleon is always right"  are his expressed, 'true' sayings that guide his life and seek to explain all problems.
Yet his ultimate truth is perverted and oppressive, and not surprisingly approved by the pigs.
The demonstrations and processions provide the animals with an opportunity to believe that they are free and can express themselves, yet this is strictly under the guidance of the pigs.
The pigs also allow Moses, the raven, to tell the animals of his journeys to Sugarcandy Mountain, but again this false image of utopia allows them to believe in freedom and happiness and encourages them to work in the light of a better, even if intangible, future.
Although Napoleon is not a specially gifted speaker he has the young pig Squealer to talk for him.
Squealer talks extremely manipulatively and powerfully.
His first duty is to rationally explain the pig's extra food as necessary to their learning and an essential factor to Jones not returning.
Fear is an important part of Squealer's early propaganda and it is so effective because the animals see language as transparent, innocently believing everything he says to be true.
Perhaps Squealer's most powerful coup is his recreation of history to fit with Napoleon's present aims.
Established or written history represents memory, which represents truth.
So through Squealer's manipulation and mastery of language he has the ability to recreate the past that leads to his control of the animal's memories and the party's unchallenged control of truth.
Squealer is able to rewrite the history of events that the animals were even part of themselves, "Now when Squealer described the scene so graphically, it seemed to the animals that they did remember it."
As memory is based on truth, and truth can be known through language, the animals are convinced that Squealers knowledge of language is so far superior to theirs that when he says Snowball was a traitor they believe it must be so.
Such is the power of language that the animal's memories of the past can even be changed in the present.
The animals have no proof of their convictions other than what they are told by Squealer.
He refers to 'documents' and 'fresh documents'  that he has as proof for any of his revelations; unfortunately for the animals their reading abilities are too inferior to understand them, so again they are left to trust him.
The written word bears extra power in a similar way to the old Major's written commandments and these are continually changed and adapted as the pigs become more and more human.
The explanation for the changes to the commandments is given as the animal's poor memories as their past values and beliefs fade away into oblivion.
Language has power over memory and the animals simply "could not remember...they had nothing to go on except Squealer's lists of figures."
The animals become collectively reliant on the pigs and lose their sense of selves.
The pigs simply continue to remind them of the past, which was far worse, their present freedom and their triumphant and caring leader Napoleon.
Orwell's final warning to the world is described in his last novel Nineteen Eighty-Four, published in 1949, a year before he died.
NEF seems to be some steps further on from Animal Farm as the novel begins with Winston, the main protagonist, living in forceful dictatorship, controlled by the imposing figure of Big Brother.
The party has complete control over society's language, thoughts and minds.
There are huge posters everywhere showing the image of a face, with the caption, "BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU."
These aggressive unequivocal posters are a constant reminder to the people that indeed, they are being watched.
The party is in command.
The party has expressed its clear power in such a way that the inhabitants of Oceania must live in fear.
In conjunction with this are the numerous telescreens, microphones, the patrol police and perhaps most fear-worthy, the thought police, those that can read an individual's most inner thoughts.
The party are pro-active in their propaganda; the telescreens transmit information such as increased production figures, military success and general news leading to the glorification of the party, which creates a feeling of collective national pride and prosperity.
The party's three conclusive slogans are also inscribed on posters, "WAR IS PEACE, FREEDOM IS SLAVERY, IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH."
These absolute truths convey the party's complete wisdom and knowledge as the written language expresses power, force and clarity.
Another key form of propaganda used by the party are the Two Minutes Hate sessions where party members are given the chance to show their hatred effusively towards a screen showing the image of the leader of the enemy, Emmanuel Goldstein.
This inimical demonstration represents a chance for individuals to feel a sense of rebellion, power and importance through expression and speech, yet ultimately the party strictly controls it.
The sessions represent the only time that party members have to verbalize themselves independently, but in reality its primary use is for the party to see those who are not conforming.
Winston is alienated in this society, for he is desperately fighting against the party by trying to hold on to his own sense of self.
His chief form of individual power is writing in his diary, an activity strictly prohibited by the party.
This activity represents Winston's opportunity of power and expression.
He wants to mark truth and influence the future as he writes to " a time when truth exists."
Winston's writings originally seem to be rather indistinguishable and confused, a " stream of rubbish"  that are seemingly only strands of disordered and irrelevant memory from a damaged and inactive mind.
Yet, as he begins to revive his brain, the activity stimulates and clarifies other memory, that of his meetings with O'Brien and Julia.
I think this demonstrates even on a small level the power of language.
As Winston writes, his memory flourishes.
The consequence of this is to activate a sense of subjectivity, which erupts inside Winston and causes him to feel indignance towards the oppressive party.
He writes several times "DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER."
It seems that revelation and consciousness are the consequences of mind expansion through language and therefore it is clear why it is so important for the party to forbid individual's own expression.
Due to the party's control of language and therefore history, Winston finds it impossible to discover any accurate account of the past.
Winston's own memory of the past is confused and indistinguishable.
However hard he tries, he concludes, "he could not remember."
The party promote modern life as simply improved from the past, yet nobody has any tangible evidence of it.
Winston seeks to remember and piece together a rhyme about the London churches, which starts "'Oranges and Lemons,' say the bells of St.
Clement's."
It becomes extremely important for him as it represents a small fragment of the past in the present, and the truth of life before Big Brother.
As he learns more and more of the rhyme, he is discovering history and unveiling hope.
Yet the rhyme concludes with the line, "Here comes a candle to light you to bed, here comes a chopper to chop off your head!"
Significantly this line is spoken as Winston and Julia are caught and surrounded by the police.
This symbolises that the wish for knowledge, language, memory, history and power leads to destruction.
For the dictatorship demand all individuals to project all their energy into the party and its collective future.
Therefore anyone searching for anything else contrary to the party's teachings will be killed.
As the glass paperweight is smashed against the floor, Winston's own consciousness is broken forever.
Perhaps the party's greatest invention is 'Newspeak', the official language of Oceania.
It uses shorter words than Standard English seeking to arouse minimum echoes in the speaker's mind.
Any subjective memory of the past will fade away in Newspeak, because the language bears almost no relation, or reflection to the past.
The vocabulary is cold, apathetic and detached.
The language is controlled by the ideological values of the party, as language comes before thought, the party seeks to control the minds of the people.
Rebellion will therefore become impossible, as it will become inconceivable.
As Syme says, "In the end we shall make thoughtcrime literally impossible, because there will be no words in which to express it."
Newspeak destroys previous words, narrowing the range of thought and by destroying heretical words it renders heresy unfeasible.
The party's power is intrinsically caught up with Newspeak.
"The revolution will be complete when the language is perfect.
Newspeak is Ignsoc and Ingsoc is Newspeak."
The target is that by 2050 newspeak will be the only language known in Oceania.
Every individual will become unavoidably part of the state, destroying any possible sense of self.
The dictatorships of the time of Orwell's writing were Hitler's Germany and Stalin's Soviet Russia.
These dictatorships used extreme violence and assassination to gain power and conformity.
Yet Big Brother's party is a step further on.
Winston perceives that "If the party could thrust its hand into the past and say of this or that event, 'it never happened'-that surely was more terrifying than mere torture and death."
The processes of this power are through the control of human minds, carried out by changing the past, and 'doublethink', the term used to describe one holding two contradictory truths together at one time, believing that whatever is the latest truth becomes the present truth, regardless of the past.
This involves conquering ones own memory.
O'Brien explains to Winston the party's lust for power over humanity, "Power is in tearing human minds to pieces and putting them together again in new shapes of your own choosing."
Winston cannot be killed until he becomes completely humiliated, emaciated and helpless and most importantly, not until he loves Big Brother.
The dictatorships of the past killed rebellious victims, but Big Brother's party demand conformity, and this everlasting power's weapon is language.
Clearly force is essential to the complete turn around of rebellious individuals in 1984, but through Newspeak, the intention is that by 2050 all minds will be controlled by the party.
This is the desired everlasting power, the boot stamping on the human face.
Does this leave the individual with any hope?
The individual seeks power to the extent that he is willing to give up his own identity for it, such as O'Brien, Charrington or Squealor.
Winston suggests that the power lies in the proles, but is this simply a wishful hope or could this be possible?
Orwell was a Socialist, and always believed in the power of the proletariat, yet became increasingly disillusioned with their ignorance.
In NEF, the proles, who represent a massive part of the population, are not even monitored, but are fed with trivial activities, such as the lottery and pornography, to keep their weak minds fulfilled and ignorant to the idea of a better life.
Winston is fascinated by the large lady's voice, her song seems to represent freedom, expression and perhaps hope.
Yet, I think ultimately it is powerless because her voice is unconscious and oblivious.
The individual has no power because the individual has no language.
For the party control the people's consciousnesses as the party control language, as Syme concludes, "Orthodoxy is unconsciousness."
The poems 'The Kaleidoscope' and 'Underworld' both concern grief at another's death, but the ways in which they deal with it vary greatly.
Whilst 'The Kaleidoscope' describes Douglas Dunn's overpowering confusing feelings surrounding his wife's death, 'Underworld' is a theoretical poem  in which Lavinia Greenlaw implores another not to die.
Form plays an important part and clearly the two poems differ enormously, Dunn choosing a sonnet and Greenlaw deciding to write in free verse, which calls our attention to the grammatical breaks as they do not fall at the line breaks.
The caesura in line three of the first pentain stops the reader dead in their tracks, the half rhyme of the first two lines perhaps having made us anticipate a more neat and structured form.
Sibilance  adds rhyme and structure to the first pentain, which considers the possibility of the person in question dying and not returning, evident in the reference to the path 'freezing over'.
Greenlaw uses the Greek myth of Persephone's kidnap by Hades and life split between the underworld and the living world as an analogy throughout the poem.
These references to ancient mythology contrast with Dunn's use of the mundane activity of carrying a tray up the stairs but both are used to inspire these musings on death.
In fact the images become almost apocalyptic in the second stanza of 'Underworld' when Greenlaw says that the 'sky will crack'.
Dunn's sonnet is included in a collection of poems on the death of his wife, 'Elegies' and appears in the book grouped together with three other sonnets, a particularly appropriate form as traditionally the sonnet's subject is love, often unrequited.
At first it may seem an unsuitable form to choose when writing about such an all-consuming grief, and perhaps a free verse form like Greenlaw's would allow more of a free reign but we find that the struggle to contain grief within the neat form actually intensifies the emotional impact of the poem.
This is demonstrated in the hypercatalectic lines seven and fourteen where we find an extra syllable escaping the form, symbolic of the social restraints put on Dunn's outpouring of grief.
Enjambement stops the poem from becoming too sing-song, too lyrical, as well as some inverted feet such as 'Might be...' at the start of line two.
The emphasis on 'might' and its repetition later in the poem demonstrate that part of Dunn still lives in hope, in the past, and this is made all the more poignant by his realisation at the end of the poem that she will never again be there in bed where he expects to find her.
The image of Dunn at the door of the room is perhaps even more affecting than the hyperbolic language used in 'Underworld'.
This difference between past and present is separated in the octave and sestet.
Although the rhyme scheme follows more closely the pattern of a Shakespearian sonnet, the turn is after line eight where Dunn is jerked out of his imaginary state and back to reality, and this is a feature of the Italian sonnet.
The conflict between these two forms highlights the confused state of Dunn's feelings.
End rhyme in the poem is mainly perfect masculine with the exception of books/frocks, and this crack in the rhyme scheme reflects the cracks caused in Dunn.
Assonance in the first line  draws out speech and gives a feeling of weariness; it also echoes the sound of Dunn's footsteps upon the stairs, an action he became so familiar with whilst his wife was ill in bed, and he now repeats.
Language is used to great effect in 'The Kaleidoscope', for example 'pillowed with your books' in the second line suggests some kind of comfort taken from these books which we later learn are lists of legacies in the form of clothes to be given away to friends before her death.
These practical arrangements have made his wife's death no easier for Dunn and he seeks comfort by sinking down into a different kind of 'literary pillow' by writing down his feelings.
The progress of the poems throughout 'Elegies' is evidence of this kind of cathartic effect.
The 'holiday' alluded to in line four links to 'France', the preceding sonnet but it is interesting that Dunn has drawn a parallel between death and a holiday, and this could indicate that he believes he will go on to join his wife in a 'better place'.
The kaleidoscope is obviously an interesting concept for Dunn as he chooses it as the title of his poem.
It could be a literal reference to mirrors though if we look more closely at the origins of the word a different meaning becomes apparent.
The word has Greek origins and translates roughly as 'beautiful form watcher' and suggests that that Dunn is talking about his wife and her attitude; she saw beauty in everything and was positive until the end.
The 'redesigned husbands' reflected in the kaleidoscope could be a reference to the husband Dunn wishes he had been and feelings of inadequacy, that it should have been him, not her, and this is followed up by his desperate act of self sacrifice by 'Offering me, my flesh, my soul, my skin.'
The anaphora in these phrases affirms his emotive offer.
However he expresses the realisation that these feelings of guilt are 'absurd' after he makes the gross understatement 'Grief wrongs us so'.
This short statement and the caesura that follows it makes the reader stop in their tracks and consider the inadequacy of words in describing the situation.
Interestingly in contrast to this the whole of the second stanza of 'Underworld' is one sentence and the lack of punctuation is as much of a feature as the use of it in 'The Kaleidoscope'.
Enjambement creates a sense of rushing along, increased by the twice used 'and' which gives a plaintive air to the second stanza, a feeling of hope that the persona will join the dead in another world, where it is summer.
The myth of Persephone and the underworld was used to explain the changing of the seasons and their use in the poem indicates that to the persona, life without this person is winter, is barren, is iced over.
The hyperbole indicates vehement, unwavering feelings of love, the persona is almost saying 'without you, nothing matters, when you are there, nothing can be wrong'.
In conclusion the poems both express the same emotions but do it in very different ways.
'The Kaleidoscope' stirs our emotion by showing how feelings of grief encompass every action whereas 'Underworld' shows us the earth shattering way that the death of a loved one could change everything.
 Othello is a prominent example of Renaissance tragedy as it simultaneously embodies and departs from the traditions of conventional tragedy.
Cultural upheaval and political instability inevitably changed the climate and definition of tragedy.
Theological speculation and the revival of epicureanism led to people being suspended between faith and reason.
Such issues permeate Othello.
Dollimore argues that it portrays a 'social order which exploits people on grounds of race, gender and class."
Sinfeild therefore implies that Iago is interpolated into his misogyny and racism as character's 'outlook is supported by their social context."
Tension between tumultuous emotion and strict political formality is inherent within Othello's framework.
New Historicism allows us examine the text within its genre.
Unlike other Renaissance tragedies, such as Marlowe's Dr Faustus, Othello betrays the influence of classical Greek tragedy rather than that of the medieval morality play.
Ribner disagrees, viewing Othello as 'the conventional morality play hero."
Shakespeare transcends the conventions of classical tragedy by discarding certain traditions such as the chorus and infiltrating new devices.
Ribner believes; Some view Othello a poetic drama, but this seems unlikely as it exhibits the characteristics of Aristotelian tragedy.
It has catharsis, anagorisis and evokes fear amongst the audience.
Othello believes himself to be a tragic hero, having to face moral choice, fall from grace due to harmatia and redeem himself.
Othello's melodramatic proclamations compare his suffering to that of Job and Tantalus; Ribner believes that; 'Othello reflects the... pattern of the Christian soul ensnared by sin, but who through suffering and self-knowledge learns to overcome it."
But, for Aristotle, the downfall of an evil protagonist is cathartic, not tragic.
Shakespeare challenges this, oscillating the audience between hating and pitying Othello as he is an 'honourable murderer."
Wine supports this, stating; As Othello is primarily concerned with psychological and emotional complexity, I believe it to be a pioneering example of domestic tragedy and agree that it is; 'closer to the immediate world of his audience than that of any other of his tragedies."
Because Othello is not a monarch, the range of tragedy is significantly diminished and only effects a few individuals.
Othello is a personal and private tragedy as Othello's nobility is destroyed, not the political state.
As Shakespeare's shortest play, action is concentrated and Dubrow believes this to be; 'more effective since its compactness makes it more...vivid,' as its fluid structure aids the play's performance dynamics.
Subsidiary characters and events mirror the central dissension, heightening the emotional intensity, whilst the lack of effective subplot adds to the claustrophobic atmosphere.
The opening senate scenes are deceptive as we are led to expect a political drama, but when the expedition is aborted the action turns in on itself.
The storm is both a rhetorical and narrative device, acting as a literal symbol of imminent conflict and as a metaphor for violent and destructive jealousy.
Audiences may have seen sexual jealousy an insufficient motive for tragedy as it traditionally dealt with what was divine, not animalistic in man.
Yet, sexual passion is central to the tragedy of  Antony and Cleopatra and Othello, like Mark-Antony is torn between his social and political responsibilities.
Moral conflict between rationality and passion is central to the play's structure.
Political instability permeates the play, heightening the suspense and uncertainty thus creating an unsettled feeling.
The omnipresent danger of war adds to the audience's accumulated anxieties.
The binary forces of politics and love are juxtaposed in direct contention and the struggle for dominance between them establishes the central tension around which all else revolves.
Othello promises to balance both, but love takes precedence over his military role despite his ironic promise to never allow 'light-winged toys of feathered cupids,' 'corrupt and taint my business."
Matheson draws attention to the blurred distinction between politics and love stating that; 'Othello prefers to conduct his political relationships in the older language of loyalty and loving service."
This in turn makes his speech 'an interesting mix of political and sexual discourse' that reveal 'the politicised nature of 'love,'' as his political register helps elevate speeches concerning love; State conflicts mirror those between characters.
Conflicting reports of the Turkish army act as a metaphor for deception and betrayal on different levels; 'tis a pageant/ to keep us in false gaze."
The political conflict between two cultures is internalised within Othello as he is torn between Christianity and his Islamic origins.
There are opposing geographical and symbolic differences between Venice and Cyprus.
Venice characterises civilised order and authority, whereas Cyprus represents dangerous passionate impulse, making Othello an outsider in Venice, but a powerful hero in Cyprus.
Shakespeare questions the assumptions and politics upon which Elizabethan society was founded through his portrayal of the Venetian state.
Both were supposedly colour blind, which makes the audience question whether is race a political issue.
Dollimore supports this asserting that; 'no cultural practise is ever without political significance."
In embodying earlier insults, Othello tragically loses his battle against his interpolated role as a black barbarian, describing himself as a 'base Indian."
Sinfeild believes that 'the civilised and the barbaric are not very different.. maintaining the distinction is a constant ideological task.
'Othello marks a departure from traditional tragedies, openly exploring xenophobia and racial stereotypes by having a heroic, black central protagonist.
Contradictory racial tensions overshadow political and domestic action.
Tennenhouse believes politics and gender are inter-linked; Shakespeare's ambivalence towards women leads me to agree with Eagleton's that; 'The woman is a constantly travestied text, perpetually open to misreading."
Desdemona's duality makes her a problematic figure as she is both 'half the wooer' and a passive victim.
Tennenhouse interprets her bold rebellion against Brabantio as a 'Jacobean assault on monarchy as she assumes authority over her body...against the will of the patriarch."
But to what degree is she rebelling against men when Brabatio's ownership is simply transferred to Othello?
The cost of choosing her own partner, is her identity and the independence that allowed her to do so.
Tragedy is inherent in their relationship.
Othello's discourse reveals that he sees her as a possession; 'use Desdemona well."
Yet, describing her as 'fair warrior' is the ultimate accolade as he recognises her equality and strength.
'Our general's wife is/ now the general' alludes to Desdemona's power over Othello and provides an insight into the play's sexual politics.
Matheson believes that; 'the domestic sphere is charged.. with displaced energies of state politics which politicises the language of this sphere."
Desdemona's 'grace and power' to move Othello infers that she is the dominant partner and uses the depth of his infatuation to manipulate him.
Othello's race and 'alien status' make him a deeply vulnerable outsider who is abused throughout.
It could therefore be argued that Othello is as much of a victim as Desdemona.
Often misinterpreted as a dramatic mechanism and symbolic counterbalance to 'hellish villain' Iago, Desdemona is more than a component of the tragedy's framework.
She is a flawed character and not simply the victim of her own slavish obedience.
Her sense of justice is exploited by Iago as; Desdemona's naiveté may represent women's lack of reasoning as she has; 'No judgement in an honest face."
Her disturbing resignation towards Othello's derogatory abuse is both frustrating and poignant.
Eagleton believes; The murder allows him to re-establish his rightful masculine dominance as he sees himself as a moral avenger of justice;'she must die, else she'll betray more men."
Desdemona's tragic surrender destroys her dignity; 'commend me to my kind lord."
Her self sacrifice symbolises female oppression.
Tennenhouse believes; 'this punishment also points right to the source of the assault upon patriarchy, the woman's political voice."
He argues that her murder is politically motivated because Elizabethans believed; 'mutilating the female could somehow correct political corruption.'
In silencing Emilia's proto-feminist wisdom, Shakespeare implies that her controversial opinions are socially unacceptable, yet he implicitly elevates her views by portraying her as sensible and observant.
New Historicism argues that Emillia's subversive dissenting voice is contained because the text represents society's dominant ideology, whereas formalist critics view the text within a vacuum.
Dusinberrre believes 'Shakespeare saw men and women as equal in a world that declared them unequal."
Emilia rejects sexual superiority; 'Have we not affections/ desires for sport?"
Her perceptive comic cynicism stems from her relationship with Iago; 'They are all stomachs.. they eat us hungrily..
They belch us."
Emila's view of men is as derogatory and playful as Iago's;'It is their husbands' faults/ If wives do fall."
Her unwavering belief in Desdemona empowers her to confront Othello, confirming Matheson's view that she is 'an agent for..political ideals of justice and liberty."
Both are murdered because they threaten their husband's masculine identity.
Matheson believes that Iago 'exerts a despotic control over his wife's actions and speech...
Her plight reflects Iago's virulent misogyny.'
Bianca's dubious reputation, social ranking and commitment to Cassio enervates her, as she is rejected, neglected and belittled.
Even the judicious Emillia disparages her, confirming Dusinberrre's claim that 'importance.. turns women against each other rather than against men who injure them."
Bianca and Cassio's relationship parallels that of Desdemona and Othello as it too is based on sexual attraction, but Adamson argues that; 'To suppose that Bianca is a foil for Desdemona is to distort and simplify what the play shows."
Tennenhouse believes that 'Jacobean drama proves one thing..sexual relationships are always political."
Iago's fixation with Desdemona's sexual appetite leads him to; Desdemona's bold assertion of her sexual rights, leads me to agree with Tennenhouse that; 'In desiring a male, she embodies male desire.
Thus the female becomes monstrous by virtue of containing male parts.'
Iago, like Othello is afflicted by a paranoid obsessive sexual jealousy desiring to be 'evened with him wife for wife."
Masculine tensions permeate the play and Matheson believes; 'The play offers an analysis of male identity within the army as profoundly dependant on place."
Iago's feeling of emasculation having not being promoted, leads him to embellish the threat of Cassio's potent sexual power.
Dusinberrre believes that; 'Imagining himself wronged, Othello feels his identity as a man of action dissolve."
Men dominate the play, but aren't portrayed as well as women, as they are murderous, week and vengeful.
The most powerful male character is the embodiment of evil.
Iago manipulates characters and language through his verbal artistry and suggestive punning.
Othello's disturbing admiration for Iago becomes apparent when he claims; 'Iago..thou teachest me."
Frightening similarities emerge between them as they share a linguistic register, alluding to animals and sexual instincts.
Othello's simultaneous linguistic and physical collapse accompanies his decent into frenzied incoherent prose, whilst paradoxically, Iago becomes increasingly poetic, stealing both his style and dignity.
Othello's name disintegrates into a series of 'O''s; 'O ill-starred wench!"
This formalist examination of structure and language represents a more scientific approach to literature.
Here, skilful form makes good literature.
American New Critics valued works that promoted unity of form and content, and therefore regard the way the text disrupts and questions itself as a negative feature.
Iago's calm eloquence allows him to communicate more effectively with Othello than Desdemona does.
Iago and Othello kneel in a parody of a marriage ceremony that provides an ironic contrast to when Desdemona kneels to proclaim her fidelity.
Collocations relating to marriage such as 'witness,' infer that Iago replaces Desdemona in Othello's emotions, whilst hinting at possible repressed homosexual feeling between them.
Shakespeare adheres to the conventions of tragedy, but manipulates and widens its limitations which inevitably effects his portrayal of politics and gender.
The play therefore encompasses the values of the Renaissance, allowing Shakespeare to explore topical issues in a less restricted manner.
Conventional and modernistic tragedy overlap thus reflecting the indivisible nature of gender and politics in the play.
Shakespeare changed the definition of tragedy and what is tragic, thus allowing us to 'participate fully in the horror which falls upon Othello, while we are.. seconded in our faith in divine order,' which is 'essence of tragedy.'
This essay aims to analyse and compare the three opening paragraphs of Louise Erdrich's 'Tracks'  to 'Her First week' by Sharon Olds .
Both texts can be defined as 20 th century American literature, although they differ in genre - the former is prose fiction and the latter is a poem.
That said, the texts share a number of similarities.
Both use techniques that are commonly found in other genres.
For instance, prose is often thought of as 'non-poetic', but throughout the passage from Tracks are literary techniques such as alliteration, parallelism, metaphors and similes.
In this sense the language of 'Tracks' does not fit the formal definition of prose fiction.
Similarly, the form and language of the poem is perhaps closer to prose than poetry, due to the absence of end rhyme and a regular metrical pattern.
Firstly, one of the most noticeable aspects of both texts is that they are mainly in past tense.
Consequently, both use diegesis, a basic form of narration that concerns telling and recounting, as opposed to showing or enacting.
The idea of story-telling is particularly important in 'Tracks'; critics such as Nancy J Peterson suggest that Erdrich intended to emphasise the oral tradition of the Anishinabe tribe.
Consequently the opening paragraphs are reminiscent of a dramatic monologue or a political speech, as the language is more phonetically significant than is usual in prose.
Some common features of American rhetoric are anaphora and epistrophe; these are both apparent in the passage.
For instance, line 11 is an example of anaphora; "but the earth is limitless, and so is luck and so were our people once".
Here the conjunction 'and' is repeated together with 'so' at the beginning of a clause, forming a type of parallelism.
Not only does this create structure by joining the clauses together, but it also highlights the sudden shift into past tense.
The parallelism in lines 8-9; "disaster must surely have spent its force, that disease must have claimed all of the Anishinabe...", firstly links the concepts of disaster and disease by using the 'parallelism rule'.
Both have the prefix 'dis', a negation marker that highlights the absence of something, and both lead to terrible consequences and loss.
The parallel structure emphasises their parallel meaning.
On the other hand, 'spent' and 'claimed' could be seen as opposites - the former denotes loosing, the latter denotes gaining.
It is interesting to note that both these terms are used in reference to money, a subject that characterises the industrialised and commercial culture that threatens the Anishinabe tribe.
The repeated structural features  reiterate the tribe's feelings of certainty, only to be contradicted by the 'but' at the start of the next sentence.
It is unusual to begin a sentence with 'but', and consequently it is foregrounded against grammatical norms.
In this case the next sentence is also a new paragraph, so the word 'but' is especially prominent.
Old's poem also crosses the genre boundary separating poetry and prose, as it rejects traditional forms of poetry.
The lines are a combination of long and short, and the number of syllables in each ranges from 7 to 15.
Perhaps Olds chose free verse instead of a predetermined form because of its unpredictability, a quality that captures how it feels to first look after a newborn baby.
Some poets think free verse allows a more spontaneous expression of emotion that does not need to be confined by the restrictions of rhyme and metre.
Based on this argument, free verse is an apt form to express the experience of motherhood, an exceptionally emotional time.
It also enables more interplay between syntax and the line, which is an important and foregrounded feature of the poem.
Another way in which 'Her first week' differs from the expected norms for poetry is that the start of each line is rarely marked by a capital letter .
This is an example of external deviation, as it breaks one of the genre norms for poetry - a norm that is external to the text.
As for external norms in relation to 'Tracks', the opening passage does not conform to the assumed 'rules' for narrating history.
The narrator refuses to use specific names and therefore limits the number of proper nouns in the passage.
For instance, he refers to "the spotted sickness" rather than smallpox or measles, and "a storm of government papers" instead of naming the specific documents.
These examples are foregrounded in the text in addition to against external norms, as they both make use of poetic techniques.
The former uses sibilance alliteration and the latter is a metaphor.
It is important to note that by rejecting the specific names for historical details the narrator separates them from their time and place, and assigns to his story a timeless quality.
Although the 'Nadouissioux land' and the year 1912 are mentioned in the first paragraph, these are the only specific details of time and place throughout the passage.
The limited use of proper nouns makes the language accessible to a larger number of readers.
Specialist terminology is likely to produce the opposite effect.
A prominent feature in Olds' poem is the change in subject matter lexis from familiar to scientific language.
'Scan' in the first line is reminiscent of prenatal hospital checks, although it does not function as a noun in this context and therefore its significance is questionable.
Later on in the poem Olds uses biological terms such as 'moire sacs', 'spine' and 'chordate'.
This is an example of internal  deviation - the reader does not expect to see terms like these in a poem about a mother's relationship with her child.
In contrast, the phrases "part by part" and "her little bottom" are much less specific and use more common terminology.
The scientific language makes the tone of the poem more detached; perhaps this is necessary so the narrator can describe the biological precision of her child.
The scientific terms in the poem are mainly concrete nouns; these are needed for accurate description.
In comparison, many of the nouns in passage A are abstract, such as 'disaster', 'disease' and 'punishments' - another feature of the passage that makes it more general.
In both texts a first-person narrator is used, and this enables the subject matter to be more personal than informational.
The result is a less formal register.
Both narrators begin to use the common contraction 'I'd', in line 8 of the poem and line 26 of the passage, to resemble familiar speech.
As mentioned earlier, the oral tradition of story-telling is an important influence on 'Tracks'.
The fact that the narrator directly addresses his granddaughter in the third paragraph creates the impression that he is speaking to her.
As the granddaughter does not or cannot speak back, we can conclude that this part of the text is a monologue.
The narrator is the main character in the story he is telling, as he refers to himself using the first-person pronoun 'I'.
It may be that the granddaughter is also a character in the story, or perhaps she is an imaginary subject that symbolises the future generation.
Again, the narrator does not use a proper noun to address her by name, and this opens up the possibility that he could in fact be talking to the reader.
The tense and personal pronouns used in the passage make the reader feel more included in the story compared to in the poem.
This part of 'Tracks' is aimed at a second-person or 'you' position.
It complicates the 'discourse architecture' of the text by introducing a narrator to narratee layer, in addition to that of author to reader.
Significantly the narrator uses the present tense, and this makes the action more immediate; "you are the child...".
In comparison, 'Her first week' uses a more basic, poet to reader discourse structure.
Unlike the passage from 'Tracks' the text is not centred on a 'you' position, so there is no narratee.
The poem is mainly in past tense, leading to a more distant representation of experience.
The opening passage of 'Tracks' appears to start at the beginning of a story, as the first sentence begins "we started dying...".
The sentence goes on to describe the process of dying; interestingly it seems this process has a beginning and middle, but no end.
The idea of continuity implies being uninterrupted and seemingly endless, and in this sense the snowfall parallels the deaths of the men.
The incidences in the first paragraph seem to be relayed to the reader in chronological order.
This is clear from the list structure of the second sentence, and the conjunction 'and then'.
But on the other hand, the pronominal references 'we' and 'what', in "we started dying" and "what descended from the north" mean that the passage technically begins in medias res, or in the middle of things.
It is assumed that the reader knows who and what each phrase refers to.
In this case the technique forces the reader to take the position of the Anishinabe people, and consequently places them closer to the action.
Using pronouns before the nouns they refer to are introduced immediately raises questions, and this creates a suspense that operates by the hermeneutic code.
Significantly the pronouns used in the passage change from 'us' and 'our' to 'I' and 'my' in line 23.
This signals a shift in focus from the group identity of the tribe to the single identity of the narrator.
It reiterates that the narrator is the last one left.
'Her first week' also begins in medias res; Olds only refers to the baby using 'she' and 'her'.
Although here the effect created is slightly different to that in passage A, as the pronouns are third person singular rather than first person plural.
The latter type is more likely to make the reader feel included in and close to the action.
But while passage A builds suspense by using the hermeneutic code , it is created in 'Her First week' using the principles of the proairetic code, a type of narration that concerns actions and their immediate consequences.
An example in lines 8-9 can illustrate this; "...damp laundry in the dryer, I'd slip / a hand in, under her neck".
The phrase "I'd slip" at the end of line 8 is by itself a complete syntactical unit, and has a different meaning if it is interpreted apart from its context in the next line.
The reader is compelled to read on to find out the consequence or resolution of this potentially tragic action.
Olds frequently uses this 'extension structure' to create an arresting or heart-stopping effect at the end of the line.
Line 21 is another, more prominent example; "Every time I checked, she was still / with us...".
By itself the line is a complete clause, and it leads the reader to think perhaps the baby has stopped breathing, when in fact the next line confirms the opposite.
Earlier on in the poem 'fallen' and 'tumble' are also enjambed, and both are actions with potentially disastrous consequences.
This technique helps to express the flashes of paranoia and worry that parents experience on a daily basis.
It is clear the focus of the poem is the baby , or more specifically the nature of a mother/daughter relationship.
The 'centre' of passage A is the Anishinabe tribe.
Incidences in the text are described in relation to, and by their impact on them.
In the first paragraph they are attacked from all directions; "the spotted sickness from the south", "a wind from the east", and "what descended from the north".
These details establish the tribe as the main focus of the text by positioning them as deictically and geographically central to the action.
A characteristic of 'I-narrators' is that they can express a biased, personal opinion.
In this case the tribe's experience is presented as a struggle rather than progress, and many of the nouns in the passage are highly modified.
For instance in the phrase "bitter punishments of early winter", each aspect of the noun group has unpleasant connotations.
'Punishments' is the noun head , 'bitter' is a harsh pre-modifier, and 'of early winter' is a post-modifying phrase.
Although the latter appears to be fairly neutral, out of all seasons winter has the most unpleasant and depressing conditions.
It is interesting that the narrator defines his age as "no more than fifty winters" rather than in terms of years, implying that winter is the most challenging time of year.
The same is true for other metaphors in the text; the simile in line 22, "like a coarse rope, frayed at either end", heightens the feeling of being exposed and inadequately protected, and "a storm of government papers" in line 6 emphasises hostility and tension.
There is also a preoccupation with death, dying and illness that is clear from the first sentence.
Erdrich does not use any euphemisms for death; as a result the third word 'dying' is rather startling.
In contrast, in the poem the similes used to describe the baby are all based on beautiful or typically feminine images, implying an optimistic outlook on birth and life.
For example in lines 7-8 she tumbles "like a load of damp laundry in the dryer".
Not only is this striking because it is a domestic image, but also the phrase is foregrounded through sound patterning.
The consonants 'l' and 'd' are fully alliterated three times each.
This alliteration is more noticeable because the sounds are stressed and occur in a syllable-initial position .
In line 25 the narrator gathers the baby to her side "like a loose bouquet" - another feminine image that is beautiful at the same time.
The bouquet is loose, emphasising its wildness and freshness; perhaps this relates to the fact that the baby is newborn.
The simile "limp as something...fallen from some sky" in lines 2-4 portrays her as angelic.
Together these all images share a peaceful and optimistic quality, one that is also shared by 'gently', 'slowly', 'evenly' and 'quietly'.
These are used throughout the poem in relation to the child, and add to the soothing effect.
On the other hand, in the metaphor the narrator uses to describe a part of herself; "struck with minuscule scars like creeks in sunlight", the language is pessimistic and harsh.
'Struck' implies a strong force, and creates the opposite effect to the calming, peaceful language in the rest of the poem.
Using 'scars' to refer to wrinkles suggests imperfection and pain, and implies a pessimistic outlook on old age.
Finally, to conclude, these texts initially seem contrasting and opposed to each other - for instance they belong to different genres, and one celebrates life, the other reflects on death.
But in spite of this, a stylistic analysis illustrates that many of the techniques they use are similar, although their effects tend to be context dependent.
Montaigne wrote "To the Reader" after he had finished the Essays; it was there to introduce what was to come and set the tone for the rest of his writing.
However, it was not thought to have been the original preface; "On idleness" was another proposed preface to Montaigne's work.
"To the Reader" demands the reader's attention from the first line when Montaigne directly addresses 'You...
Reader'.
This adds an element of informality and continues in a discursive style from then on.
Montaigne is able to be very undeviating with his intent telling the reader exactly what he thinks they need to know and about his intentions for writing these Essays.
He declares that, 'I myself am the subject of my book' and at the same time it is 'a book whose faith can be trusted'.
This gives the reader a good sense that this book will be straightforward and honest because it is a book that Montaigne is using to show something of himself and not that he is writing to construct a fictional sense of himself.
Therefore the reader will feel that they have some special insight into his life and his personality, somehow that they know him without having met him.
This would allow the reader to appreciate many more of the sections in the book because they are not being forced to agree with his ideas, they would not be shunned if they didn't like it, they merely get some grasp of what Montaigne, himself would have thought about many different subjects.
As he says himself, 'I have not been concerned to serve you nor my reputation' which pulls the reader in even more and would make them want to carry on reading because they are having nothing imposed upon them.
"On idleness" is presented in the book of Essays but is thought to have been an alternative preface, mostly because of the way it addressed the reader and declared what Montaigne proposed to do with his works in a similar way as in "To the Reader".
Having read "To the Reader" allows whoever is reading this to appreciate it more than if they had not because the reader will already be familiar with Montaigne's discursive language and will be sure of his style and what he is attempting to show.
However, this will also be very interesting to the reader because having read the first preface they will be able to see another of Montaigne's reasons for writing the Essays.
Not only did he write these books, 'to the private benefit of my friends and kinsmen so that, having lost me  they can kind [me] here again' as he states in "To the Reader"; he also seems to have written it to keep 'a record' of the workings of his mind while he is retired to his estate as "On idleness" points out.
With both of these pieces, though, it would be clear to the reader this early on that Montaigne is concerned about getting older and is becoming increasingly sure of himself and coming to the end of his life.
"On presumption" is a section in book two that is moreso concerned with Montaigne himself and the ability for people to become too loving of themselves.
This is described as a glory or 'vainglory' and 'over-high opinion we conceive of our own worth', but the reader with be able to appreciate  that Montaigne is not one to revel in his own self-worth; on the contrary, he often humbles himself as he did in "To the Reader", 'my powers are inadequate' and in "On idleness" he states that these Essays are not to flatter himself, but to 'make my mind ashamed of itself'.
Montaigne consistently depicts himself honestly and especially so in "On presumption"; however the reader may only feel reassured that this is honest if they have read "To the Reader" and are able to appreciate Montaigne's tone and style.
Book two, chapter seventeen therefore reinforces Montaigne's honestly and modesty again and the reader is able to feel that they further get a deeper insight into Montaigne, the man.
As he declares, 'I find myself bogged down in the laws of etiquette', it is clear that Montaigne is not the conventional Renaissance man who would be expected to be familiar and concerned with the profile they have in the court.
As seen in The Book of the Courtier it is clear that people at this time that were surrounded by the upper classes, were always concerned with the image they project and there were very clear codes of behaviour and conduct surrounding this.
Yet Montaigne in "On presumption" says that it is this kind of self-assurance and esteeming of oneself is not desirable for him and he is the first to avoid any appraisal for his work because, first and foremost, he has not written it for recognition.
He even considers that the language with which he writes is 'rough and disdainful', and also that he has 'no idea how to please, delight or titillate'.
But ironically it is this not caring or trying to please that allows the reader to appreciate his work even more and intrigues them further.
In "On three kinds of social intercourse' Montaigne goes on to write about the things that please him.
He details why it is that he enjoys loving friendships, loving relationships and reading books but also the negative aspects of all of these.
Montaigne's tone, again, is in-keeping with what the reader is already familiar with.
He humbles himself again and makes it clear that in his work he is embarking on a 'study' of the mind and not to feed his ego by being concerned about himself.
However, he is aware that 'no occupation is more powerful, or more feeble, than entertaining one's own thoughts' therefore keeping the reader comfortable knowing that Montaigne is not claiming self-importance.
Montaigne also discusses briefly how he enjoys to 'probe himself' and that there is some more value in exposing his soul rather than to 'stock it up'.
He presents the reader with the complexities that he faces when writing these books and that he is aware how 'no occupation is more powerful or more feeble than entertaining one's own thoughts'.
Having read "To the Reader" it is important to realise how this is a point that Montaigne has made many times and that he is merely reinforcing it again to show the reader even more how he doesn't regard himself highly and how they can appreciate what he has to say but not dwell on it because, after all, it is 'feeble'.
He goes on to talk of loving friendships and how difficult they are to come across, bearing in mind that he only concedes to have had only proper friendship, it would occur to the reader that the aim of this writing was not just all Montaigne has stated but also to fill some void that not having a deep, loving friendship creates.
It is also clear that Montaigne feels a great sense of loss from the death of his friend and so writing in this way is a method to keep his mind occupied but also one way that he will be able to continue until his death .
To appreciate this text and the others fully, it is important to have read "To the Reader" because otherwise the reader may think that if Montaigne does not regard himself too highly then there was little point in him writing these works, which are almost memoirs.
However, having read "To the Reader" and then the texts that were to follow the reader can appreciate the writings of Montaigne and his selfless attitude as well as having some idea of the man himself.
The advantages to having presented "To the Reader" as the preface for his works are that Montaigne is to directly address the reader showing he is aware that they have been drawn to his book, also that he doesn't want them to think he wanted them to be drawn to his work because he didn't write it for them exclusively or to get their recognition, but furthermore that he can allow them to appreciate his work as an outsider looking in on the workings of his mind without them having to agree with or like his work, almost as if he has already criticised it himself therefore protecting it from negative criticism.
In recent years, discourses of post colonialism have drawn attention to what Chris Brookes calls the 'major and continuing significance of the cultural products' of the British Empire over its four centuries of rise and fall.
There is a veritable plethora of work anthologising these writings; however, in this anthology my aim is to look at the after-effects of British colonialism in India and to focus on the writings of the ex-colonies rather than the ex-colonisers.
In Edward Said's Culture and Imperialism  he discuses the importance of imperialism 'in shaping the modern world' and asserts 'connections between British imperialism and literature."
Although he is referring to the effects it had in shaping the image held by much of the Western world of the East, the effects of the British Raj in India were far reaching within India itself, in that educated Indians in the nineteenth century began to respond to Western thought and literature.
It is almost one hundred and fifty years since native Indian troops in Meerut mutinied, resulting eventually in the end of colonial rule in India; it was not until the withdrawal of the British that the phenomenon of Indian verse written in English began seriously to exist.
In this short collection of poems I have looked for those which can be said to be 'Indian in sensibility and content, and English in language."
This is poetry 'made out of thoughts and feelings, not the objects which give rise to them."
Although all the poets included here also write in a variety of Indian languages, I have excluded poems written in any of the native Indian languages and translated into English.
This is not, by any means, because such poetry is of no account.
On the contrary, poetry has been a traditional form of expression in India for 'more than two and a half millennia;' without enormously over-extending the length of this anthology, all the work of such beauty and account could not be included.
R. Parthasarathy states that 'in our time poetry is becoming increasingly concise."
For this reason I have intentionally steered away from a multitude of brief Indian poetry such as much of the work of Vikram Seth, and included some longer, lyric poetry.
The poetry that I have included in this anthology is 'rooted in and stems from the Indian environment' although the subject matter may be concerned with other themes and places.
This is intended to highlight the beautiful paradox which is at the core of Indian poetry written in English, and to draw attention the difference between the language of poems such as these and the 'liveliness and idiosyncrasy' of the language used in African or West Indian writing.
R. Parthasarathy states that this is due to the fact that Indian writers in English are particularly conscious of their 'indianness,' and identifies the 'uneasy tensions' that can arise in writing in a language one is not born into.
There are long traditions of literatures in Indian languages, and those poets that choose to write in English can be said to have a 'relative sophistication,' which can be seen in the particular idiom they use.
'There has always been a time-lag between the living, creative idiom of English-speaking peoples and the English used in India."
The effect of this use of language can be somewhat surprising in the context of modernist poetry.
For example, the use of the word 'thereon' in and when you reach for the bark may you find the flowers thereon.
seems to particularly stand out.
The poems I have selected for this anthology have, for the most part, little or no use for English prosody.
Due to the fact that for all of these poets English is not their first language, the emphasis is 'almost entirely on the visual as opposed to the aural element' in their verse.
This can be seen clearly in D. Chitre's poem Travelling in a Cage, in which the visual effect of the breaking up of lines such as 'nothing' in line four cuts into the deep structure of the sentence, in what Hollander  calls contre-rejet.
A similar effect is seen in The Gharghra in Spate by K. N. Daruwalla, in which the double pattering in the formation of the lines in the third stanza has a great effect on the imagery created by the poem and our mental picture of the water-logged landscape being described.
Other than the second poem in this anthology, The Golden Gate by Vikram Seth, there is a marked absence in these poems of special prosodic features such as metre and rhyme.
However, one feature appears prominently: these poets 'favour a short as opposed to a long line as the unit of composition."
Often the lines break abruptly, such as in K. N. Daruwalla's To My Daughter Rookzain, in which each line can be said in a single breath.
This has the effect of spilling over the meaning from one line to another, and forcing the line to seek a balance outside itself.
These poems are for the most part examples of free verse, what Richard Bradford calls 'the most significant contribution by poetry to the formal aesthetics of modernism."
He also tells us that in order to identify a poem we must look for a 'structure whose formal common denominator- that which separates it from non-poetic discourse- is its division into lines."
Therefore it can be said that what these poems display beautifully is the idea that a poem is formed by the spaces in its lines as much as by the words: for example, that the effect of the irregular line breaks and stanza formation in Looking for a Cousin on a Swing  have as much effect on it's meaning as the imagery and language used.
Free verse disrupts or rejects the conventional forms of verse, and the only common feature of free verse poems, as seen in this short collection, is the existence of syntax and the line.
The order in which these poems are displayed holds no particular significance; however, as a collection of poems they are distinctive in that they all display the 'poetic qualities of metaphor."
From the extended personification of the Gharghra River in The Gharghra in Spate , the writer becoming 'an insect of solitude' in Travelling in a Cage , and the summer 'hiding' behind hills in A Day of Rain , it is this figurative language that forms the basis of these poetic writings.
'In the context of Indian verse as a whole, the contribution of poets writing in English is only marginal."
Similarly, the same can be said in the context of English poetry as a whole.
These poems may seem to be too much rooted in the Indian countryside and ways of life to have significance to a predominantly British readership.
However it is undeniable that these poems are 'a legitimate expression of universal, human experience,' and as such have relevance beyond their immediate subject matter.
In Beginning Theory we are told that the study of literature 'cultivates the taste, educates the sympathies and enlarges the mind."
However, whilst this may seem like reason enough to study literature, it is worth noting that these qualities are not quantifiable, and therefore the study of literature can have no fixed 'knowledge component."
Why then, should it be studied?
'Literature has historically been seen as dangerous: it promotes the questioning of authority and social arrangements.'
It is, after all, 'an institution based on the possibility of saying anything you can imagine."
Therefore literature has the possibility of fictionally exceeding what has been thought and written before I am going to look at Sir Walter Raleigh's poem "A Vision Upon the Fairy Queen.'
When read in relation to the New Historicist theory as stated by Stephen Greenblatt in The Norton Anthology of Theory and Criticism  it can be said that this poem 'should be restored to the past in order to make it count in the present;' that in order to fully grasp the significance of this work of literature, it should be examined in the light of the social and political climate in which it was written.
J. W. Lever has argued that we should look at Jacobean literature as 'a product of the intellectual ferment and spirited upheaval which preceded the first great European revolution."
Although this is a poem written during the Elizabethan era, the first stirrings of this 'spirited upheaval' are being felt, such as the Essex rising as mentioned in Greenblatt's essay.
Therefore by writing of a queen who is 'attended' by the 'Graces'  Raleigh is engaging in a dialogue of flattery with the Queen and firmly asserting his loyalty to her.
Most 'of Raleigh's poems were intimately linked with his place in the court and in particular, with his fantastic courtship with the Queen' and this one is no exception.
By focusing on the 'historicity of the text and the textuality of history' we can see that this poem is both fostered by the prevailing cult of the 'Fairy Queen' that surrounded Elizabeth I and is generating such an image.
Indeed, it is an example of how 'life and literature stimulate and play upon each other."
New Historicism hopes to find 'through historical research, a stable core of meaning within the text."
In this case it is possible to guess at the intention of the poet if we take into account the volatile politics of the Elizabethan era, and the importance that the Queen herself placed on fostering the 'ideal of perfection to which she was wedded at the moment of her consecration."
Raleigh himself stated 'Now we have a Present made,' in reference to his poetic dramatization, strengthening the idea that literature shapes history just as it is shaped by history.
It is fair to suggest that in doing so, 'drama is holding a mirror up to nature,' not only reflecting the image of 'nature' but reflecting onto it.
Through the poetry and propaganda during Elizabeth I's reign, such as that seen in the works of Raleigh and Edmund Spenser who also wrote of a 'fairy Queene,' 'Elizabeth is transformed almost completely beyond human personality, appearing as an image of static timeless perfection."
This was an important political tool at a time when few members of the population would ever actually see the Queen, and therefore her hold on her subjects had to be maintained through rumour and public image.
Therefore the 'most excellent and glorious person of our soveraine the Queene, and her kingdome in Faery Land' written of by Spencer, Raleigh and their contemporaries played a key role in creating this mystifying and eternal image of the Virgin Queen.
A different style of critical approach is seen in the feminist movement, which I will look at in reference to an extract from Virginia Woolf's 'Mrs.
Dalloway.'
In contrast to the contextual approach favoured by New Historicists, Helene Cixous states that 'the future must no longer be determined by the past."
In the writing style adopted by Woolf for this and many other of her novels, Woolf is making a break from the outmoded 'dominant phallocentric logic' that prevails in literature before the 1920s by writing in the style known as Ecriture Feminine, reflecting the multiplicity of female life.
Woolf found that language use is gendered, and that for a woman there is 'no common sentence ready for her use."
She therefore presents us with a myriad of impressions of the moment: The fluidity of the sentences and the lack of grammatical and syntactical rules show Woolf's attempt to get away from the 'formal railway line of the sentence.'
T. Moi states that 'through her conscious exploitation of the sportive, sensual nature of language, Woolf rejects the metaphysical essentialism underlying patriarchal ideology which hails God, the Father or the Phallus as its transcendental signified."
In her essay Cixous bemoans the lack of writing that 'inscribes femininity,' and the female writers 'whose workmanship is in no way different from male writing."
Although Woolf's writing stands against this patriarchal style, continually escaping 'the critic's perspective, always refusing to be pinned down to one unifying angle of vision,' Woolf herself sought an androgynous writing style, and is indeed criticised by some feminists for 'wanting to flee her female gender by embracing the idea of androgyny.'
The narrative in 'Mrs.
Dalloway' is repeatedly pierced with the striking of Big Ben and the 'leaden circles' which sound out the time are 'irrevocable.'
This structural motif stands as 'the model of the self-contained powerful phallus' representing the State and the 'political- and thus masculine- economy."
This phallic interruption to Mrs. Dalloway's feminine flow of consciousness is in stark contrast to the flow and the flux of the rest of the novel, and can be said to show Woolf's 'inevitable struggle against conventional man' in her writings.
As she famously states in 'A Room of One's Own:' 'a woman must have money and a room of her own if she is to write.'
Readers bring 'an implicit knowledge....to their encounters with text."
This idea of 'reader-response' criticism states that 'the meaning of the text is the experience of the reader."
By reading a work of literature, you are in effect engaging in a discourse of sorts with the author.
As the actual feelings or intentions of the author can never be reconstructed or successfully guessed at, the 'real living individual is now entirely superseded by the literary text which has come down to us,' and the reader's interpretation of the text rather than the intention of the author that must be the 'standard for judging the success of a work'.
We should study literature in order 'to emancipate us...from the notion and habits which are peculiar to our own age, connecting us instead with what is fixed and enduring.'
If it is the case that 'good literature is of timeless significance' somehow transcending the 'limitations and peculiarities' of its age in order to speak 'to what is constant in human nature' it should be studied, in the light of the critical theories I have mentioned and others, in order to draw on the insight and experience of characters, fictional or literal, of the past, to the benefit of those in the present day.
Gothic romance fiction pivots around a central female character, classic Hollywood turned to the Gothic providing a genre in which women's anxieties and preoccupations, and different social concerns, were represented.
The use and portrayal of women's subjectivity is an essential feature to be studied in relation to Gothic films.
I intend to examine these aspects to explore why the Gothic privileges women's experience and analyses of Rebecca and Dragonwyck will illustrate my argument.
Gothic stories share a series of recurring elements, there is the heroine; the male protagonist she is attracted to; their opposites, another man and woman; the house where the story is set, and finally a secret which the heroine encounters.
The female protagonist is a young, innocent and shy girl, such as the heroine in Rebecca or Miranda in Dragonwyck.
The narrative focus of Gothic stories lies on this figure who is both the victim and the investigator of a mystery.
Even though the heroine is caged in a threatening environment, she does not undertake an active strategy, her shy and submissive characters refrains her.
Her sense of curiosity is alert but she lacks an assertive investigative attitude.
The difference can be seen more clearly comparing a Film noir heroine to a Gothic one.
In Dragonwyck, Miranda puts up with Nicholas's rejection when they lose their son.
She endures the solitude for weeks until she dares confront him in the tower room.
Also, as regards physical passivity, when Nicholas attacks Doctor Turner after hearing his accusations of murder, Miranda simply looks on and remains immobile.
The secretary in Phantom Lady, on the contrary, is an active character.
Kansas decides to do whatever is in her hands to help the male protagonist, Scott, and prove him innocent of his wife's murder.
She looks for the mysterious woman who can give Scott an alibi, even dressing up and going out with strangers, something that would be very daring for an innocent Gothic heroine.
There is one clear female protagonist in Gothic romances and the spectator is inclined to identify with her.
Her emotions and perceptions are emphasised through the use of mise-en-scène and subjective narration.
The female carries the weight of the story and guides the spectator through the film.
The importance of the female protagonist also stands out through the male's reliance on her.
Kim Wheatley explores this emotional dependency through what she calls the "spectacle of male dependence".
In Rebecca, for example, Maxim relies on the heroine for help and support during the investigation for Rebecca's death.
Also, during his confession speech to the heroine, Maxim exposes himself and, therefore, opens up emotionally as he tells her exactly how he felt for Rebecca.
This emphasises that the Gothic is a genre for women as the spectacle of male dependence is reassuring for them, as Wheatley argues.
The fact that men emotionally depend on women and that their emotional fragility or sensitivity is conveyed can be encouraging.
Also, as it can be seen in Rebecca, the patronising husband who never really externalises his love for his wife, turns out to need and love her.
The heroine is attracted to the male protagonist: an older, enigmatic and powerful man.
Their relationship sustains the emotional weight of the film and reflects aspects of contemporary society, as regards family structure and control.
In Dragonwyck the male protagonist Nicholas is wealthy and has an influential role in society.
He is older than Miranda and a controlling man in all ways; when they are travelling to Dragonwyck on the boat, Nicholas talks down to Miranda and orders her not to say "golly" but "beautiful" when speaking and Miranda complacently obeys.
Also, when he asks for Miranda's hand, he decides they are going to get married straightaway, even though her father does not agree, Miranda's response is just "I'll do whatever Nicholas thinks best".
The heroines are shadowed by the man's bold, patronising personality and attitude.
The heroines marry the protagonists without knowing too much about them and are attracted immediately.
Miranda is captivated by Nicholas in Dragonwyck even before meeting him, she is fascinated by the idea of him being "terribly rich and elegant"; and the exchange of looks when they first meet in New York anticipates their relationship.
Nicholas' mysterious character resonates from the start, especially through the use of mise-en-scène.
Vincent Price's performance slowly gives clues to the spectator that he is hiding something, just like Laurence Olivier's does in Rebecca, with Maxim's sudden mood swings when anyone mentions water or Rebecca.
The main characters contrast with two other major figures in Gothic stories, the "other woman" and the "other man".
Both characters are antitheses of the protagonists.
The "shadow-male", as Joanna Russ names him, as opposed to the male protagonist, is gentle, calm and caring and may serve as a substitute for him, such as Doctor Turner in Dragonwyck .
When Miranda is leaving after Nicholas' death, he says goodbye and asks her if he can call her.
Dragonwyck ends, therefore, with an optimistic feeling now that the heroine finds a caring man to be with.
The figure of the "other woman" is clearly explained by looking at the character of Rebecca.
Her image haunts the heroine throughout the film; Rebecca was sociable, popular and beautiful.
In addition, Maxim finally talks to the heroine about her, and the spectator discovers she was aggressive, unfaithful and defiant.
The "other woman" is regarded as a threat to the heroine as she has to compete with her, therefore, another anxiety.
This leads on to another characteristic of the Gothic, the hidden secrets.
The heroine always discovers a certain secret related to her husband: in Dragonwyck Nicholas turns out to be a murderer and in Rebecca, Maxim has covered up Rebecca's death.
The emphasis on portraying contrasting characters in a mysterious entourage relates to women's anxieties such as the fear of the husband, of not being loved or of having chosen the wrong man.
Another crucial figure in the Gothic is the actual setting of the story.
There is always a scary house where the protagonists live, Manderley and Dragonwyck epitomise this.
The use of mise-en-scène in the opening scene of Rebecca creates a dreamy and sinister atmosphere thanks to the use of chiaroscuro which serves to present the house as a menacing place and introduce the story hinting at Manderley's tragic end.
The protagonist's voice over adds to this as her tone changes throughout the speech and there are relevant pauses to build up the intrigue.
The fact that it is a first person narration and the spectator does not know who is talking, also adds to the mystery.
During her adventure, the heroine also meets a young person or, on occasions, an animal.
This figure is related to the husband and also the mystery.
In Rebecca, the heroine has the dog Jasper which takes her to the boathouse and in Dragonwyck, Katrine is neglected by her parents, especially Nicholas, and provides the first clues about Nicholas' desire for a male heir.
The presence of homely fears in the Gothic is a fundamental aspect to appraise.
In this genre, fear emerges from an interior anxiety as it is related to solitude, darkness and silence.
This can be seen in Rebecca for instance, as the heroine dreads estrangement from her husband.
Localising fear in the home enables the Gothic to consider anxieties facing women now that domesticity is a sphere traditionally related to them.
Also, Gothic heroines tend to never leave home, they seldom carry out household jobs and this gives them time to worry about uncanny threats and husbands.
Freud's concept of the uncanny refers to fear related to the habitual, where what is familiar becomes unfamiliar and torments us.
Domestic figures become intimidating and haunting.
In Rebecca, Maxim's bizarre behaviour confuses the heroine and in Dragonwyck, Nicholas becomes a threat to Miranda.
The domestic environment is unsettling and menacing, Miranda in Dragonwyck believes that the mansion is her dream, it symbolises wealth, power and a life of happiness away from the farm but turns out to be the opposite.
Gothic heroines are insecure at home at one of the reasons is because they are not in control of their own premises.
There are two main spaces in a household, the public and private areas.
The Gothic heroine feels so threatened, that her private sphere is also in jeopardy.
In Rebecca, the heroine is not even safe when she is in the space reserved for her such as bedrooms or the Morning room, now that Mrs. Danvers, part of the service, has access to her private sphere and Rebecca is omnipresent.
This is most clearly appreciated in Dragonwyck as Nicholas' first wife Johanna is actually poisoned in bed.
The uncanny elements in the stories can lead the protagonists to paranoia, they are unsettling for the protagonist and undermine her confidence.
This is evident in Rebecca as the heroine's continuous efforts to reach Maxim are in vain and cause her to break down.
The heroine tries to confront Mrs. Danvers when she is rejected by Maxim at the ball but ends up collapsing in front of her and considering suicide.
She is convinced Mrs. Danvers is determined to drive her away from Manderley and Maxim.
The Gothic heroine believes she is victim of a plot.
In Dragonwyck this proves to be true as Nicholas wants to poison Miranda but in Rebecca, Mrs. Danvers is actually also seeking Maxim's destruction and not the heroine's.
Mrs. Danvers looks at the heroine suspiciously and judges her movements.
When the heroine tells Maxim that she accidentally broke the china figure in the Morning room and he wants her to tell Mrs. Danvers and Frith, she begs Maxim to do so himself because she fears Mrs. Danvers.
The Gothic heroines become paranoid with what they know and do not know.
The protagonist obsesses with the situation and with the fact someone is after them.
The heroine in Rebecca is self-conscious and her efforts are focused on being worthy of Maxim because she believes Maxim and his entourage are judging her.
The heroine tends to be a "'stand-in' for someone else" and which deepens her anxiety and paranoia.
Besides the disturbing presence of Mrs. Danvers in the film, the use of motifs - another element of mise-en-scène-, like the repetition of Rebecca's initials, also adds to the heroine's paranoia.
Repetition is, in Freud's study, an element of the uncanny as is doubling, a major theme in the Gothic.
Many characters and situations are doubled causing anxiety and symbolising menace.
Past experiences and events haunt the characters' present and surface certain preoccupations.
Freud related doubling to the uncanny now that reliving past events is so.
This echoes the fact the heroine is a "stand-in"; doubling is evident in Dragonwyck as Miranda is Nicholas' second wife and he plans on murdering her just like he killed Johanna.
In the light of a Freudian interpretation, the inclusion of paranoia and other personality afflictions surface unconscious anxieties, which leads on to sexuality in the Gothic.
The Production Code prohibited explicit sex but mise-en-scène gives films a large scope for subtle visual imagery and can spur many interpretations.
The figure of the "other woman" is also a medium of expressing sexuality now that she represents the latter and, also, immorality.
The seductive and sensual women in the Gothic are normally punished for their outward behaviour, Rebecca, for instance, tortures Maxim with her love affairs and ends up dead.
Gothic heroines, on the contrary, are virtuous even though they may even portray sexual anxieties.
With reference to a later film, when Kit in Midnight Lace  breaks down in the lift believing her life is at threat, her hysterical outbreak and rescue by the "shadow male" of the film, connotes a sexual encounter.
Not only do suspense and paranoia overlap in Gothic films, but also terror and horror.
Fred Botting differentiates them explaining that terror focuses on fear appealing to emotion and imagination while horror causes confusion and paralysis and is coupled with death.
Women's Gothic films privilege the former over the latter.
I believe concentrating on the psychological side of fear can be seen as an attempt to appeal to the feminine conscience and attitude.
Internalised fear causes anxiety and Gothic heroines do not externalise their fears, therefore, the Gothic offers a genre through which to channel women's anxieties.
One of the main characteristics of the Gothic is the importance of passion and extreme emotions.
Traditionally, masculinity has been related to coldness and rationality while femininity and women are linked to sentimentality and emotion.
A masculine style is expected to be less passionate than a woman's and Gothic films and stories stand out for their passion-driven plots.
The narrative structure of Classical Hollywood Cinema has a cause-effect chain of events that arises from the actions of the protagonist, thus in Gothic films, the development of the action is a consequence of the heroine's actions .
In Classical Hollywood Cinema, the desire of the protagonist is the catalyst for the story, therefore, Gothic films depend on their heroines and besides their active or passive nature, clearly the plots revolve around women.
In Rebecca, the heroine's reactions, regards the situations around her, shape the story.
The unnamed heroine's desire is to be loved.
She constantly strives to impress Maxim and win his affection, such as when she chooses her costume for the fancy dress ball.
At the end of the film, the heroine is relieved to find out the truth about Rebecca's death because rather than uncovering the truth, she finally discovers how Maxim felt about Rebecca.
This desire is also conveyed in Dragonwyck when Miranda tells Nicholas she is pregnant.
Miranda is upset because she has been arguing with Nicholas and when she breaks the news she asks, "Have I done something to please you at last?
", clearly showing her distress at the thought of not contenting her husband.
Also, after their son's death, Nicholas spends more time alone in the tower room.
Miranda's curiosity leads her up the stairs to see what he is doing there.
She asks him to confide in her and share his unhappiness and problems and "be a part of you", desperately seeking a connection with her husband.
A similar pattern in the narrative can be drawn from Dragonwyck.
The chain of events more prominently arises from Nicholas' desires as he longs for a male heir and poisons his first wife and attempts to murder Miranda because they cannot give him the son he wants.
However, in this case the female protagonist's desire can also be considered the catalyst for the story.
Miranda seeks to get away from home, as she tells her family at the start of the film when they receive Nicholas' request for a companion for Katrine; her arrival at Dragonwyck and resulting relationship with Nicholas set off the story.
Gothic films introduce the issue of female subjectivity.
Their stories are about women so it is mandatory to consider feminine point of view.
Spectators experience the heroine's perception and interpretation of events.
In Rebecca, the spectator accompanies the heroine throughout the whole film with a small exception at the end when the men travel to London.
It is the heroine's story one lives and her anxieties and fears one encounters.
Films can use subjective narration in various forms such as point-of-view shots, hallucinations or flashbacks, for example.
Rebecca uses subjective camera and voice over at the beginning of the film.
This introduces one to the story and the narrator herself, although the subjective point of view provided by the voice over is lost at the end of the film.
This initial sequence is clearly subjective and the camera itself acquires the heroine's perspective as it glides through the gates of Manderley while the narrator introduces her flashback, hence, her story.
It is the heroine who prepares the spectator for the film.
The suspense comes from what the heroine does or does not know.
The spectator shares her knowledge and discovers the mystery with her as the film develops.
One also assumes Maxim is distressed because he has lost his wife and not because he has covered up her death.
It is not until the end of the film, with Maxim's confession to the heroine, that the spectator discovers the truth.
The image the spectator has of the other characters in the film is the same one the protagonist has, as they are defined according to how they interact with her.
Maxim is presented as a patronising man; in one of the first scenes of Rebecca the heroine wants to go and play tennis but bumps into Maxim who snatches her racket and decides, for her, that they will go for a drive.
Also, when Maxim takes the protagonist out he addresses her like she is a child, telling her to "blow your nose!"
or "stop biting your nails!"
The heroine is intimidated by her husband, even though she is in love with him, and the powerful image that subdues her is passed on to the spectator.
The representation of women on screen not only asks for a review of subjectivity and identification, but also of objectivation, contestation and recuperation.
The visual style of a film can objectify women, making them appear as spectacles, consequently the spectator shares a male point of view when looking at women on screen.
Borrowing an example from Written on the Wind, when Mitch meets Lucy, she is clearly objectified.
Mitch walks into the office and just sees Lucy's legs, the camera offers a subjective shot and focuses on her legs to show what Mitch is looking at and convey sensuality before offering the spectator a larger shot of the protagonist.
However, women do not have to be entirely confined to certain roles, contestation offers the chance for women to break away from social norms and restraints.
Nevertheless, only to be redirected to their initial situation, hence, recuperation.
The camera objectifies Miranda throughout Dragonwyck especially thanks to the use of three-point lighting which accentuates her physique.
After Johanna's death, Nicholas goes to Greenwich to ask for Miranda's hand.
When she walks down the stairs to meet him, the low angle shot empowers her and the bright light glamorises her.
Nicholas wants Miranda and the spectator is encouraged to share his point of view.
As regards contestation and recuperation, Miranda rebels against social norms and expectations when she goes to Dragonwyck.
She does not comply with her father's standards and insists on going away to discover a world beyond the farm.
However, recuperation puts her back in her place now that due to her contestation, she suffers bad fate.
Miranda goes back to her family when Johanna dies and ends up returning permanently to Greenwich after Nicholas' death.
The supernatural features, extreme emotions and suspense in the Gothic hint at escapism, however their contents display social realities.
Women's desire for social freedom is presented for instance in Dragonwyck.
The dream of not conforming to the role seizes Miranda from the beginning.
The close-up of her face, enhanced by a bright light, intensifies the strength of her speech as she looks up and away from her father.
Gothic romance films were extremely popular during the 1940s, audiences were largely female so studios wanted films women would enjoy and relate to.
Women faced a changing scenario where family structures, social norms and roles were evolving.
The fact that women were caught in a period of change explains why the Gothic could represent their preoccupations.
The anxieties they were living are reflected on screen through the mysteries at home.
Husbands and daily life could be regarded as elements of disquietude, homely fears and the uncanny come into action to trap Miranda in Dragonwyck's mystery, for example.
It is interesting to highlight that there were many early marriages due to World War II; a note that brings the Gothic theme of enigmatic husbands to mind, as Diane Waldman points out.
Gothic films such as Rebecca reflect a patriarchal family where the male is in charge of the household.
One of the recurrent figures is that of the "other man".
Gothic characters represent social archetypes, in this case, the character represents the less authoritarian male: the alternative to patriarchy.
Other fears relating to femininity are also common.
Motherhood is a source of anxiety in Dragonwyck as Nicholas murders his wives because he cannot have a son and his ancestors suffered the same fate.
The Gothic brings women's concerns closer to cinema with the adaptation of women's point of view and the reflection of social reality through themes and motifs.
Gothic films place women in the centre of their plots and women's issues are reflected through characters and relationships on screen.
The Gothic heroine is the primal focus and the spectator is encouraged to align with her.
The attempt to develop subjective narration and appeal to women's identification conveys how the Gothic offers a suitable genre to consider women's anxieties.
During the Victorian period there was what is known as the 'Victorian crisis of faith' due to scientific discovery, changing philosophy and doubts over the validity of the Bible.
This crisis of confidence in Christianity was experienced mostly by intellectuals who renounced the Bible as literal fact and replaced it by a humanistic religion.
These changing ethics were clearly illustrated in the literature of the time; the discourses of the writing and the characters portrayed in them.
Both George Eliot and Thomas Hardy were sceptical of Christianity, especially some of its strict moral standards, but both felt that its altruistic teachings were beneficial.
They both used the Bible richly as a resource for their novels and I will discuss their use of it and their alternative humanism looking at Eliot's Silas Marner  and Hardy's Tess of the D'Urbervilles .
George Eliot's  parents were members of the Anglican Church and sent her to schools which were strongly influenced by Evangelical teachings of the day.
Eliot became especially involved in church at the age of 12 when she began teaching in Sunday school but it was not until the age of 15 when she became convinced of Evangelical Christianity.
Nineteenth Century Evangelical teachings emphasised the doctrines of eternal salvation and judgement, original sin, justification through faith alone and activism.
Yet there were many ambiguities; shown by new emphasises later in the century, as to how one is assured of salvation and what the implications of biblical doctrines were.
Preachers did not see the Bible's teaching as a whole and so were left to hold different human authors, such as Paul and James, in opposition to each other.
People felt great unrest because they were left unaware of whether or not actions on earth determined one's salvation because they did not have a balanced biblical understanding.
Amidst the confusion, Eliot felt great relief in dropping her faith, Her anxious and ascetic lifestyle did not provide much resistance to the thinking that she became aware of when introduced to the writings of Charles Hennell.
He believed Christ's life was a myth made up by humans writing about the historical Jesus.
Eliot was particularly convinced of the inadequacies of the Bible when she translated Strauss and Feuerbach.
Strauss believed the gospels were a "literary construction", not historical truth, and he replaced dogmatic Christianity with a religion based upon community and humanity.
Feuerbach claimed that the Christian God was simply a product of man seeking to imagine perfection.
He believed that the greatest and most important feeling in nature was the love between fellow human beings.
Eliot felt the moral teachings of Jesus were beneficial but concluded that the Bible itself consisted of "mingled truth and fiction".
She was also hugely influenced by the 'positive' philosophies of Auguste Comte who promoted human altruism, solidarity and the progressive improvement of the world through human goodness.
Despite Eliot's changing thinking she presented a slightly ambiguous figure as she remained much attached to the Bible.
Hennell had claimed Christianity to be "the purest form yet existing of natural religion" and Eliot herself judged it as "the highest expression of the religious sentiment that has yet found its place in the history of mankind".
Her novels in fact became increasingly more religious in content and filled with Biblical allusion and imagery.
In Eliot's Silas Marner Lantern Yard is described as a "narrow religious sect" .
This description is suggestive of a Calvinistic emphasis on the doctrine of salvation through election.
The community's belief in the explicit power of the supernatural mean they are intrigued by Silas's peculiar fits and single him out for a special role.
Eliot presents Silas as a confused soul in response, not wishing to exaggerate his experiences and uncertain how to interpret them.
He describes himself as being "not in the body, but out of the body"  a reference to the apostle Paul  talking of visions and revelations from God.
The occasions when Silas has his trances are important; namely when he is waiting by the deacon, which leads to his downfall and when Eppie appears in his home, which is his reward.
So I think the biblical allusion demonstrates the importance of the trances as visions and revelations from God or a higher being.
The people's response is to accept it as supernatural guidance and intervention, something they eagerly desire as they draw lots later on.
By comparing Silas and William Dane's friendship with that of David and Jonathan,  Eliot is investing their relationship with a special significance.
Yet Eliot portrays Dane as the manipulative, superior partner and Silas as the unsure innocently influenced youth.
Dane is "faultless"  in Silas's eyes, whose weakness is to "admire imperativeness and lean on contradiction" perhaps a scathing reference to Proverbs 3:5 as an image of the Christian life being one of swapping any intellectual critique in place of trust.
Silas and Dane discuss assurance of salvation, and Dane's reference to a supernatural viewing of the words "calling and election sure"  from 2 Peter 1:10 is a clear example of the community's Calvinistic tendencies.
Yet also it shows an unbalanced understanding of the doctrine that was perhaps typical of the confusion over the subject in Eliot's day.
The doctrine of God's sovereignty in predestination is to be held in conjunction with people being held responsible for their actions on earth and having the choice to believe or not believe in the rescue provided by Jesus.
Yet Dane's viewing suggests that one must discover whether one is chosen or not; in his case possessing "unshaken assurance" leaving Silas with an honest and anxious claim of his "hope mingled with fear".
Silas's anxiety over his future is reminiscent of Eliot's own feelings when she explained that "at each moment I tread on the chords that will vibrate for weal or woe for all eternity".
Through the biblical discourse, Eliot has created an uncomfortable 'spiritual' atmosphere for Silas, one that represents an aspect of Christian thinking in her time, and one that both she, and Silas, are happy to abandon.
Dane suggests Silas's cataleptic fit is from the Devil, exhorting him to remove the "accursed thing" from within his soul.
Eliot is making a reference to Joshua 7 when after the siege of Jericho; Achan is condemned to death for violating God's covenant by stealing possessions devoted to destruction.
Dane's harsh biblical language provides him with the authority to suggest that Silas's inner evil and will are against God.
Dane also questions Silas over anything he might have done to "give Satan an advantage"  a reference to 2 Corinthians 2:11 where Paul is discussing forgiveness, and calls the people to forgive each other so that Satan might not outwit them.
Dane uses this passage written to a community and focuses on a battle taking place in the "secret chambers" of Silas's heart, employing a biblical reference to an imagined incident that cannot be proven.
Later on in the novel Silas refers to Dane as "mine own famil'ar friend in whom I trusted, had lifted up his heel again' me"  taken from David's Psalm 41:9.
Yet David was able to continue and say "But you, O Lord, have mercy on me" whereas Dane's malign treatment of Silas leads him to lose his faith in God.
Throughout Silas's accusation, he repeats the phrase "God will clear me" being confident of his innocence, yet the lots fail to provide the divine intervention of justice that Silas expects but instead suggest Dane's manipulation of the naïve religious community.
Silas's distress at his "disappointed faith"  seems the inevitable reaction to the lots which falsely proclaim Silas's guilt.
When Silas relays the events later to Dolly, she summarizes by saying Dolly's unconventional way of referring to God in his Trinitarian form perhaps suggests poor understanding or intelligence rather than familiarisation, yet I think Eliot is emphasizing her innocent care for Silas in opposition to the seemingly distant or non-existent God.
On one hand Eliot is showing Dolly's naivety and therefore the manipulation of the Raveloe church, but on the other hand, the church that does not take doctrine too seriously is congratulated because it is mostly concerned for the community companionship and goodwill that Eliot believes in.
Silas's deep felt anger at the injustice so infuriates him, he proclaims, "There is no just God that governs the earth righteously, but a God of lies, that bears witness against the innocent" .
This unequivocal blasphemy denies the God of the Bible and reminds the reader of Job who cried out to God for mercy and yet received none despite his innocence.
Job was a rich and powerful man, blameless and upright and a man who feared God.
Yet God let Satan test him and took away all he had.
Job never cursed God in quite the same way as Silas but still despaired at the God who he claimed "denied me justice" .
Job is encouraged by his wife to curse God but he never did and God rewarded him by revealing to him his sovereignty, answering his call for a mediator between God and man in Jesus Christ and rewarding him by giving him twice as much as he originally had.
Although Silas's experience does in fact lead him to reject God  he in the same way is innocently punished and yet rewarded.
Silas's comforters  are also reminiscent of Job's and both have friends, in Dane and Eliphaz who suggest that their judgement is just, due to their actions.
The rich comparison of the two and Silas's new discovery of community life introduces the god of Eliot's humanitarian religion, the god of love between humans in relationship to each other.
Silas is not only originally comforted by the people of Raveloe after 15 years but it is through the mysterious gift of Eppie that he is enabled to gain his reward, the experience of real love from human care and affection.
After Silas's gold is taken from him all he can do is expectantly "watch for the morning" , a biblical image  exhorting people to put their hope in the Lord's redemption.
This comes as the gold metamorphoses into Eppie, Hepzibah is the name given in Isaiah 62:4 to confirm God's covenant with his people that they will be righteous.
Eppie's arrival is the turning point in the novel, and for Silas this means the discovery of himself and life within the community; a life of "pure peace and joy" .
Eliot uses the image of the transfiguration, where Jesus was seen in all his glory alongside Moses and Elijah  showing that he was the Christ , to show Silas's own self-realisation.
He has now grasped fully his life and its meaning.
The last paragraph at the end of chapter 14 is vital to understanding Eliot's critique of religion.
She is clearly discussing religion because of her allusion to the "City of Destruction" from Genesis 19 where the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed by God because of their grievous sin.
It is also a reference to John Bunyan's well known religious novel Pilgrim's Progress , as Christian begins his journey from the City of Destruction.
"In the old days" is suggestive of time development; of something that is past and finished.
The use of the phrase "there were" is interesting as the reader knows that Eliot does not believe this, I think perhaps she is giving value to former societies who believed this and maybe even hinting ahead of her time in the belief, or lack of belief that truth is relative.
"We see no white-winged angels now" unequivocally attacks Christianity, claiming there is no evidence or proof.
The statement suggests collective denial, even though at the time this would have been shocking to read as most people had not come to this conclusion about Christianity.
Eliot's tone is slightly mocking as she promotes her rejection as logical and seems to be asking others to follow her lead, which is not characteristic of her as she never took great interest in persuading others to doubt their faith.
The child's hand depicts the end of religion, substituting it with a human being, but the child is described as innocent and good, as the Romantics depicted children.
This comment is against the Evangelical and Calvinist doctrine of original sin, widely discussed at the time, which says that through Adam sin entered the world with the consequence that all humanity is subsequently fallen in nature.
So rather than the child being fallen and in nature sinful, it is described as innocent; yet untouched by the world.
The "calm and bright land" describes heaven or paradise which is idyllically promoted as doctrine-free and irrespective of the Christian God.
The utopian ending in the Conclusion describes future wealth and prosperity through nature, love and the continuing harmonious working community.
There is no possible return to the oppressive and dimly lit Lantern Yard or dogmatic Christianity; instead the philosophies of Feuerbach and Comte are ringing in the readers ears as the future looks bright and glorious.
Eliot's overall use of the Bible in Silas Marner demonstrates her belief that dogmatic community will never succeed, but instead the essence of Christianity - the moral teachings of love, are the only lessons that can help modern society.
Thomas Hardy had a not so dissimilar upbringing to Eliot as he also went to church in his youth and he even considered going into church ministry at the age of 25.
But as he read more contemporary science, especially Darwin, he became sceptical of Christian dogma and subsequently lost any faith that he might have had.
He became an agnostic and he saw the church as an oppressive institution.
He was judgemental of some Christian doctrine; especially its strict laws about sex, yet at the same time affirmed Christian charity.
Hardy had an extensive knowledge of the Bible and used it often in an ironical way to attack Christianity.
Hardy's bleak novels never provided a substitute religion; he believed the universe to be indifferent and only had hope in, along with the positivists, the power of human aspiration and feeling.
Tess of the D'Urbervilles is richly laden with biblical imagery and allusion.
Tess's downfall starts before the reader even meets her, her ancient family's legacy is reanimated by the Parson, who reminisces with Tess's father and pronounces "how the mighty have fallen" .
This cliché comes from David's lament for Saul and Jonathan after they had been killed in battle.
It immediately places Tess in an ill-fated position and perhaps Hardy uses this allusion to state that it will be through the eyes of the Bible or religion that she will be doomed and condemned.
The family are later compared to having fallen like Babylon , which is an ironical reference to Revelation 14:8, where Babylon is referring to the adulterous nation who rejected God.
Although the Bible is using the word to mean the nation's rejection of God in terms of a marriage relationship, I think Hardy is using it to suggest that literal adultery might be at the root of the D'Urbervilles decline and therefore God's revenge upon adultery and sexual promiscuity.
Tess's mission to re-establish the family name and re-acquaint with the D'Urbervilles is akin to the Old Testament the idea of a kinsman redeemer, where it was the obligation of close relatives to take on responsibility for others in the family in case of special need such as buying out of slavery, redeeming family land or taking care of a widow.
Tess is similar to Ruth, who followed her mother-in-law Naomi back to Israel and married her kinsman redeemer Boaz.
Tess is compared to Ruth later in the novel  as she works in the fields, but before this she expects Alec to play the part of Boaz, as she cries out "But I - thought you would be kind to me, and protect me, as my kinsman!"
Hardy uses this biblical allusion yet Alec, rather than playing the role of Boaz, destroys her.
He is instead compared to the "spoiler" , an image from Judges 2:14 referring to the people that God used in his anger against Israel after the Israelites had forsaken him and worshipped other gods.
By using this image Hardy is in fact condemning any guardian of Tess as negligent or cruel as they render Tess helpless.
Hardy asks the question "where was Tess's guardian angel?"
And suggests he is asleep like the "ironical Tishbite" said.
The Tishbite is Elijah, who in 1 Kings 18:27 proposes that Baal might be sleeping and not responding to his prophet's calls.
This passage is a triumph for LORD as God, yet Hardy twists it to condemn even God's existence as Tess is left alone to Alec's menace.
The narrator longs for a reason for the tragedy of Tess's rape; even acknowledging a potential wrongdoing on the part of Tess's ancestors.
Yet he concludes, In Exodus 20:5 God promises to punish children for the "sins of the fathers" and Hardy denounces this judgement as inhumane and inexcusable.
It leaves the reader with the clear understanding of Hardy's religious scepticism and his overwhelming sympathy for his protagonist.
Hardy introduces the religious text painter to show that Tess is condemned by the church.
Hardy felt the church's immovable stance on sexuality was an unnecessary hindrance and unnatural cause of sorrow and suffering in life.
His first quote, "THY, DAMNATION, SLUMBERETH, NOT"  is presumably a call to Tess's imminent judgement, but in its context, Peter is discussing God's judgement upon false teachers and therefore Hardy might be twisting it to accuse the text painter of his unrighteous judgement upon Tess.
I think it is most likely that Hardy has taken it out of context because in the MS. version of the novel the text reads "THE, WAGES, OF, SIN, IS, DEATH" and the next quote is from the Ten Commandments, condemning adultery  which suggests Hardy wants to show the church's judgement on Tess.
His response is to make a scathing attack on the "poor Theology!"
that accuses Tess, stating that it "had served mankind well in its time" but is no longer relevant in the current society or the future.
From the outset in the title page Hardy is keen to promote Tess as a "Pure Woman" despite the moral paradox.
This is always in conjunction with opposing pernicious Christian teaching; whose standards of morality he claims are "out of harmony with the actual world"  and "unknown to the environment" .
Tess is described as at harmony with nature which Hardy claims puts her much more in tandem with her forefathers than those who abide by the "systematized religion taught their race at a later date" .
Comte's philosophies are pertinent here as Hardy denounces theology as a humanity-dividing and an anti-society device.
He also makes a huge claim by saying that the Bible has only been introduced after original religions, despite its claims to be God's word from the beginning of time.
Hardy goes on to claim that the law found in the Bible is in fact only an "arbitrary law of society" having "no foundation in Nature" .
Hardy backs up his claims in the narrative as he portrays Tess's good nature without doctrine and its negative influence on society's treatment of her.
Due to her tragedy, Tess becomes "an alien...though it was no strange land that she was in"  and Hardy is happy to use a biblical image  because in fact it is the target of his blame for Tess's situation.
Tess is also condemned by the Bible through Angel's parents when they read out Proverbs 31, which describes and proclaims the wife of noble character that they presume Angel has found, but in fact they are damning her.
Yet is through the Bible that Hardy chooses to praise Tess most extravagantly.
Angel describes her as "true, and honest, and just, and pure, and lovely"  taken from Philippians 4:8.
Hardy continually portrays Tess's perfect submission to Angel, including her "Apostolic Charity"  taken from 1 Corinthians 13:4-5 written by Paul.
Hardy's ultimate praise of Tess is revealed by Izz Huet who says to Angel "nobody could love 'ee more than Tess did!...
She would have laid down her life for 'ee" .
Hardy is depicting Tess as Jesus, whose demonstration of love to the world was to die for its people so that they might be put back into relationship with God.
Hardy could not make a stronger biblical allusion than to compare his protagonist with the king of the Bible, extolling her goodness.
Yet in doing so, the reader cannot fail to remember Hardy's claim that the Bible and the Church are what are condemning his 'pure' protagonist.
This sums up clearly Hardy's overall use of the Bible; his biblical allusions are primarily to describe the book's influence as oppressive and the cause of much suffering for Tess, and its detrimental influence upon society.
The core factors of Eliot's utopian ending spring from the essence of her human religion that has replaced Christianity, that of community fellowship and love.
Hardy does not provide an alternative to biblical Christianity, Angel Clare's silence on the matter is notable, but there are perhaps suggestions which represent much of the changing religious and ethical thinking of the time.
Angel does not believe in the literal resurrection  or the centrality of the cross in the teachings of Jesus, but in the "spirit"  of his teachings.
His opinions can be seen through Tess, who argues to Alec that "you can have the religion of loving-kindness and purity at least, if you can't have-what do they call it-dogma" .
This debate focuses on what the consequences are when one decides that there is no God, whether there is any reason or ability to act benevolently towards each other, or whether God's existence is in fact irrelevant.
Jesus summarises the law as a love for God and then others.
Eliot believed this was selfish love, and immoral because it was only benevolence for a reward.
But the law was never given in this context; it was given to Moses after God had rescued the Israelite people from slavery and had made them his own.
Therefore the context was never, 'follow these laws in order to get to me or earn my favour' but rather, 'this is how to live in relationship with me.'
The motivation for obeying the law was the enjoyment of God's blessing.
Eliot fundamentally misunderstood this, and as a result fundamentally misunderstood God's character, seeing him only as an oppressive tyrant and consequently always took her morality out of its context.
Both Eliot and Hardy use the Bible as a literary and cultural resource in their novels but they do not seem to appreciate that its morality flows out of its theology, doing violence to its coherency.
The Bible says obeying the law  will only come from a motivation to please God as a response to the cross, and will be impossible if there is no help from God, let alone no God.
Alec responds to Tess by saying, "I am not going to feel responsible for my deeds and passions if there's nobody to be responsible to".
This statement is reminiscent of Frederich Nietzsche's scathing criticism of Eliot for holding onto Christian morality after dismissing the Christian God.
Hardy's view is reflected through Tess' response to Alec when she claims he had mixed two different matters , "theology and morals" together which she believed were in fact distinct.
A significant problem I find with the atheistic humanism of Eliot and Hardy is that morality and truth become subjective once there is no objective law giver and therefore anybody is able to justify oneself and one's standards as acceptable as there is no objective comparison.
As Eliot and Hardy reject God and consciously begin to believe they know best then selfishness takes over and moral standards slip; and I believe that what many people would identify as a decline into increasing decadence in our society today is a testament to this.
Eliot and Hardy's search for a religious formula that might unite society, without God, was and ultimately will be fruitless because the morality that they so earnestly sought after already had its context bound up in the character of God.
In this essay I will be discussing the way in which time is used in the genres of Drama and the Novel.
In particular I will be focussing on The Winter's Tale  and Emma , and will look at ways in which time is used in these texts.
Novels have been described as 'long narratives in prose dealing chiefly with contemporary life'.
These long narratives generally consist of a detailed plot and storyline, this detail creates a fictional world in which the reader can enter and explore into.
Novels are designed for private reading, during this time the reader interacts with the characters and internalises the scene and setting.
This fictional world becomes more realistic for the reader when a sense of time is added.
When the reader is put into a time-specific moment in a novel, the moment reads with a more realistic feeling.
The moment becomes more intimate with the reader, and, by sounding more realistic, the time-specific moment draws the reader into the text more than if time had not been added.
This enables the reader to internalise the story more.
An example of a time-specific moment in a novel is: This extract contains a lot of modifiers e.g.
'bright', 'cold', 'vile', making the text very descriptive.
This description sets the scene allowing the reader's imagination to run wild, in doing so the text becomes more realistic and the text is internalised.
Dramas are usually time-restricted ; this means there is less time to put in such detail through oral methods.
This makes sense, as dramas are fundamentally visual spectacles, time however can be portrayed through the use of background features , or through the use of a narrator.
In The Winter's Tale , a narrator personifying time is quickly and visually used to describe a shift in time of sixteen years.
The use of such an unrealistic character is a feature of the fantasy-like subject matter apparent in romantic dramas.
The character of Time plays an important role in providing a visually dramatic, effective way of engaging the audience and preparing them for the sudden skip in time.
It helps bridge the gap between the tragic start and the comedy-like conclusion, and also aids in speeding up the duration of the drama.
Time adds structure to a novel, Ian Watt  wrote that: The plot in Emma  follows a linear chronological order, events moving in time systematically, present situations arising from previous situations.
Examples of this are the relationships between characters, specifically those that lead to eventual marriage .
As the novel unfolds, the interactions between the characters are presented in a linear chronological order, so the reader is able to keep track of what stage the relationship is at.
The use of time differs in The Winter's Tale , the plot does not unfold in such a linear fashion, and in some situations a reversal of time is used.
An example of this is Hermione's apparent death and resurrection.
When the statue of Hermione miraculously transforms into the real Hermione, the law of time has been broken.
In reality death is the ending factor of life, this does not apply in The Winter's Tale , so in comparison with Emma  the plot is therefore less plausible.
However, since The Winter's Tale  is a romantic drama the subject content doesn't have to be plausible, the reversal of time allows a supernatural event to happen, this is a common feature in this kind of drama.
Emma , as a novel on the other hand, aims to portray realistic contemporary fiction, this means that time needs to act in a realistic way to achieve a plausible plot.
Time is important for character development in the Novel.
Ian Watt  said that, 'characters of the novel can only be individualised if they are set in a background of particularised time and place."
Due to the length of narrative in a novel, the reader is given a lot of description regarding the personalities of the main characters.
In Emma , this intimacy with characters is further enhanced by the inclusion of Emma's thoughts throughout the story.
The reader witnesses the development of Emma's personality; as the text unfolds she becomes more mature and eventually recognises her own faults in personality.
At the start of the novel, the reader learns that Emma intends never to be married, however, as the plot unfolds, her thoughts change and she ends up getting married.
Time has allowed the reader to follow the events that led to Emma's change of view regarding marriage.
A change in personality is often gradual; therefore, if the novel did not stretch across a length of time this development would not be possible.
However, since The Winter's Tale  is a drama, the audience is unable to get to know the personality of characters as deeply as they do in Emma .
Dramas have less time to give detailed character description; this is because they have to conform to a certain time period.
Compared with the long narrative of the novel, dramas have less time in which to show the gradual development of a character.
The character of Perdita is an exaggerated example of this in The Winter's Tale .
The audience is unable to observe the development of Perdita's character as sixteen years of her life have been skipped.
The audience view the abandoning of Perdita, and also learn that a Shepherd decides to take care of her and bring her up as his own.
However, shortly after this scene, the personification of Time reveals a jump in time.
This creates problems for the audience understanding the character of Perdita.
Due to this lack of description and detail of character Perdita is unfamiliar, so the audience is unable to make personal judgements of her character based on her history.
In Emma , the amount of time characters spend together during a visit is a good indication as to how important they are socially.
In general, the longer the visit, the more socially important the visitor deems the host to be.
An example of this is when Emma advises Harriet to visit the Martins for only a short period of time to show that Harriet is not interested in any further formal acquaintance.
By shortening her visit, Harriet is indirectly telling the Martins that previous interest and respect has been lost, and that she regards herself socially higher than the Martins.
Therefore, the amount of time spent during visits between the characters in Emma  gives an indication towards social importance and the strength of a relationship regarding respect and credibility.
Seasonal change in The Winter's Tale marks the dramatic change from tragedy to comedy.
When Perdita is abandoned, it is wintertime in Bohemia, the weather is cold and reflects the sad events regarding Antigonus' death, the wrecking of his ship, and of course, the abandoning of the baby.
However, after Time mentions that sixteen years have passed, the audience learns from Autolycus' song that spring has arrived 'When daffodils begin to peer'.
This merry song marks the end of sad events and prepares the audience for the happy conclusion of the drama.
The inclusion of seasons sets the scene for the events that occur, since the audience has preconceptions of spring being a time of new life and happiness, and winter being a time of frozenness, coldness and possibly unhappiness.
In conclusion it is seen that time adds structure to a novel, conventionally, it is a factor that remains stable and constant.
In comparison, dramas often use time in less conventional methods; this can make the plot more fantastic and dramatic.
Due to the length of a novel, a lot of description can be conveyed to the reader.
This allows the reader to internalise the characters and environment more intimately, which leads to a better understanding of the novel.
Dramas, on the other hand, have to conform to a certain time period, therefore more visual representations have to be utilised.
Examples of this are; seasonal changes and the preconceptions these seasons carry; and through other methods such as the personification of time as a narrator.
In novels, time is important for the development of character personality, it can also highlight the social importance of characters.
Time is an important factor in both drama and the novel, the plots in both genres need to progress towards a conclusion, and time is invaluable in providing this progression.
The given statement proposes a number of ideas using several key terms.
This essay will break the question down into sections, defining these terms and arguing to what extent the given opinions can be considered as true.
Furthermore, it will explore a range of ideas and techniques within modern literature with reference to Virginia Woolf's Mrs Dalloway and Joseph Conrad's Heart of Darkness.
It is possible to consider "Modernism" as a cultural phenomenon which permeated both art and literature that was produced during the period.
It has also been suggested that works of art and literature that are "accommodated under the umbrella of modernism [...] share a relationship to the modern world which is peculiarly new and exceptional to any other previous cultural and historical condition."
Modernism as a period peaked during the early decades of the twentieth century, a time often referred to as "High Modernism".
The period was one of innovation and anxiety; excitement and fear; people within the modern society were searching for new answers.
In order to determine whether writers during this period "lost in faith" in narrative, it is important to understand the levels operating within this framework.
A number of literary theorists have referred to "narrative" as "a particular form of representation implementing signs"; it is, furthermore, "necessarily bound up with sequence, space and time".
Narrative is essentially the mode of sequencing and selecting a set of events determined by the overall "plot".
The modern period saw a disruption in narrative continuity; a distinct move away from realist linear narratives.
Paul Cobley asserts that "narrative has the potential to be thoroughly captivating", but, as suggested by Peter Brooks, narrative must entail a number of delays or detours.
These detours, Brooks argues are "a crucial site of potential enjoyment in a narrative."
Both Mrs Dalloway and Heart of Darkness give evidence of such narrative detours, which function to give the texts layers of meaning and embrace the ""thickness" of [modern] experience".
Virginia Woolf regarded narrative structures, particularly the meta-narrative of history, to be gendered as specifically "masculine", and sought to feminise the novel.
Hence, it is possible to argue that Mrs Dalloway is in fact an "anti-narrative"; a series of detours tenuously linked together by a fine thread.
It is clear that the text pulls strongly against the formal linear, forward drive of conventional narrative structures.
However, this is not to say that Woolf "lost faith" in narrative, rather that she wanted to change it.
Unlike Conrad's novel, which is essentially driven forward by Marlow's journey, the journeys in Mrs Dalloway seem to occur outside the text; it could be argued that other than the characters' journeys through the streets of London, the only journeys move backwards through memory.
Woolf largely marginalises exterior events, using them mainly as mere triggers to direct characters in and out of interior monologues.
However, if the key term in defining narrative is that it is the "mode of sequencing and selecting a set of events", Mrs Dalloway, it might be argued does have a narrative structure.
Throughout the novel Woolf employs various techniques of focalisation, whereby the novel moves between several key characters, or focalisers, whose inner thoughts and emotions are conveyed through the third person, but in the absence of an authoritative narrating voice.
This method is often referred to as "Free Indirect Discourse", or "Narrated Interior Monologue".
Through this technique the city of London becomes part of the consciousnesses of the people who inhabit it.
It is thus possible to argue that Woolf has not "lost faith in narrative", but has manipulated the elements of narrative space and sequence in order to present her readers with a multi-dimensional and deeply psychological perspective of the modern world.
Of course, the novel is not entirely built upon this technique.
Woolf presents us with various levels of representation which guide us into the consciousnesses of the characters, using both direct, and indirect, speech and thought.
Although there is no authoritative narrating voice, there is a narrator who subtly guides the reader through the text.
It is possible to apply Walter Benjamin's term "Flaneurs" or "idle stroller" to the individual characters used within Woolf's focalising process, what she called her "tunnelling technique".
There appear to be three key "flaneurs": Clarissa Dalloway, Septimus Warren Smith and Peter Walsh.
Each of these characters serves to parallel and contrast each other creating a highly complex narrative structure.
David Bradshaw considers that, "Even by Woolf's extraordinary standards, Mrs Dalloway is a deeply organized novel."
This "tunnelling technique" is evident throughout the novel, whereby an external image will bring return the reader from behind the eyes of one character to a more narrative position and perhaps connect them to a different focaliser.
It is such techniques which give the text a sense of structure and a feeling of moving forward.
Woolf's novel is a poetic narrative, whereby the diachronic structures of conventional narrative are broken by the application of synchronic, poetic features.
This is particularly evident in Septimus's own narrative which is fractured by his own diachronic historical narrative as a soldier, and his synchronic desire to be a poet.
Such conflicts throughout the text create a dramatically disintegrated continuum which sets Woolf's work apart from more traditional, "masculine" forms of narrative.
In Heart of Darkness there is also little evidence to support the view that writers of the modern period "lost faith in narrative".
Indeed Conrad's narrative is far from being simple, but again it is possible to argue that Conrad has utilised elements of narrative in order to create a "short but rich narrative".
Conrad's narrative is problematic partly due to the ambiguity of whose story is being told.
Much of the text is spoken by the second narrator, Marlow, who is in turn introduced by a first narrator who remains nameless.
It is often questioned whether it is Kurtz's story, as narrated by Marlow, or Marlow's own story, or even the story of the first narrator as he listens to Marlow's tale.
However, this is not to say that Conrad has "lost faith in narrative", but that, like Woolf, he experiments with the voices present within the novel as a whole.
In his essay, "Discourse in the Novel", Mikhail Bakhtin suggests that the novel can be defined as "a diversity of social speech types, sometimes even diversity of languages and a diversity of individual voices, artistically organised."
Bakhtin considered novels to be "heteroglossic"; that is compiled of a number of different voices.
It could be argued that Conrad uses the voices of the two narrators to shape his narrative which is dually concerned with the levels of morality and dynamics of imperialism in the modern period, and an exploration into the "fragmentation of the self".
The third level of narrative is that of "time".
Paul Ricoeur forms an understanding of time and narrative "as being on intimate terms precisely because narrative is the human relation to time."
In both Mrs Dalloway and Heart of Darkness there are two levels of time.
In Woolf's novel structural time is indicated throughout the novel by the chimes of Big Ben: "There!
One it boomed.
First a warning, musical; then the hour, irrevocable."
However, there is also a strong sense of temporal time to which Henri Bergson referred as "durée"; the way in which time works inside our heads.
Throughout the novel there is a distinct contrast between the public, exterior and structured time, and the temporal time of the characters whose thoughts we follow.
This duality of time can also be understood as the actual time of the novel, set in the space of one day - a hot Wednesday in June 1923- and the time outside the novel recorded in the memories of the characters.
Ricoeur shares Brook's view of the importance of the "end point of the narrative"; that "the understanding of successive actions, thoughts and feelings in a narrative is dictated by anticipation of the conclusion".
In Woolf's novel, the anticipated "end point" is ultimately Clarissa's party for which she spends the large majority of the narrative preparing.
It might also be argued that Septimus's suicide is also an anticipated "end-point".
In Heart of Darkness it is also possible to identify two levels of time, stemming largely from the use of two narrators.
The first level of time belongs with the first narrator in whose words Marlow's tale is framed.
This time is that, in the past, where Marlow and his four listeners are sailing out of the Thames Estuary, and Marlow recites his tale.
The second level of time is that of Marlow's narrative which is set further in the past, and is "shaped by the contours of a voyage."
This second level of time is further complicated by the nature of Marlow's narrative in which he moves backwards and forwards; it is held together largely by the two divisions between chapters which mark the three stages of his journey and meeting with Kurtz, giving the narrative a more linear drive forwards.
Once again, all of the narrated events anticipate Marlow's meeting with Kurtz, an event which is constantly deferred.
However, the reader, like Marlow, discovers that indeed this is not the end that was anticipated.
It might be argued that the second part of the given statement, suggesting that the "stories" written at this time were no longer "interesting", could not be further from the truth.
Indeed, novels such as Mrs Dalloway observe the lives of "ordinary" people on an "ordinary day".
However, the highly imaginative narrative techniques of intertwining and overlapping consciousnesses make the novel one with a wide range of dynamics.
Furthermore, the issues raised from the text also provide various areas of interest.
Conrad's Heart of Darkness can also be read on several levels: the questioning of imperial morality; the journey into the inner "self"; or even simply as a nautical adventure into unknown lands.
Modernist writers did indeed focus on capturing "mood" and creating "complex characters" but this was not at the expense of narrative, rather it enabled the writer to construct narratives with extremely deep levels of meaning.
A key example of the use of mood in this way is the opening of Conrad's Heart of Darkness.
As the narrator looks back upstream he comments that "The air was dark above Gravesend, and farther back still seemed condensed into a mournful gloom, brooding motionless over the biggest and greatest town on earth."
This "gloom" becomes more "sombre every minute" and when "at last" the sun sets, it does so as if "stricken to death by the touch of that gloom brooding over a crowd of men."
The first narrator's description here creates a sinister mood; it also brings into the text what is a key element in many modernist works: the city, in this case is London.
Richard Adams suggests that the "inference" in the narrator's commentary" is not that London and everything [...] within its confines are somehow contaminated by the hovering darkness", but that "the darkness is an image or physical embodiment of all that the "monstrous town"  stands for."
The way in which Conrad has captured the contemporary "mood" of the city and his impressionistic use of symbolic imagery is just one of many features of the text which make it an "interesting" story.
Frederick Tönnies referred to the urban, modern city as being in a state of Gesellschaft whereby society in the city has become a loose aggregation of people; the term identifies a disintegration of community and sense of alienation.
It is possible to suggest that this opening passage of Heart of Darkness powerfully illustrates such feelings that were rife during this period through the capturing of a "mood".
In Woolf's novel, the capturing of mood is quite different.
It might be suggested that "mood" in Mrs Dalloway is generated by the characters themselves.
The novel considers, among other things the "social and psychological impact" of the First World War.
One method used to capture the consequent "moods" is the way in which the present is consistently haunted by the past; Bradshaw writes that: "Like the chiming of Big Ben, the past is both "irrevocable"  and ever present in Mrs Dalloway. "
Clarissa represents a group of people who can "thank heaven" the war is "over".
However, there are a number of characters for whom the "hurt is undiminished."
In particular, the war lives on inside the psyche of Septimus Warren Smith, whose battle with "shellshock" is a poignant reminder of the horrors of war throughout the novel.
The "mood" created by such contrasting attitudes is both tragic and hopeless, evoking empathy for those, like Septimus, who suffer as a result.
Bradshaw asserts that "Woolf drives home her sense of the War's ongoing tragic aftermath, its refusal to leave hold of the living" through the "persistence of memory".
What is particularly "interesting" about Woolf's technique is the way it embraces the common modernist motif of memory and desire; whilst a majority of the characters show a "desire" to move forward, they are continually lost in "memory".
The final part of the statement points to the construction of "complex characters".
In her essay, "Mr. Bennett and Mrs Brown" , Virginia Woolf refers to Mr Arnold Bennett's view that "The foundation of good fiction is character-creating and nothing else [...] If the characters are real the novel will have a chance; if they are not, oblivion will be its portion".
However, Woolf's essay is in fact a critique of Mr. Bennett's own methods of "character-creating" which focused largely on exterior description.
In her essay "Modern Fiction" , she argues that "an ordinary mind on an ordinary day [...] receives a myriad impression [...].
Life is not a series of gig lamps symmetrically arranged; life is a luminous halo, a semi-transparent envelope surrounding us from the beginning of consciousness to the end."
This also provides an argument to support the deliberate restraint to adhere to a linear drive within the narrative.
Later she purports the way in which she, herself, would construct her characters in Mrs Dalloway: "Let us record the atoms as they fall upon the mind in the order in which they fall."
Much modernist literature shared this tendency to probe "deeper into the unconscious layers of modernity and confront[s] it with its own hidden anxieties."
In both Mrs Dalloway and Heart of Darkness this is evident in the creation of "complex characters".
Furthermore, it might be argued that it is these characters that, in part, create "interesting stories".
In Heart of Darkness Kurtz, Marlow and his predecessor, Fresleven are the only named characters; every other character is called after their function which might suggest that "they are types rather than strongly individualised figures" emphasising "the symbolic meaning of Marlow's tale."
Marlow is clearly the most "complex" character in Conrad's novel, although this is not because of an internal sense of "self", but rather he is complex as a construct.
Immediately involved in the text, his own personal reactions to his experiences on his journey to, and in, Africa are "a major aspect of his narrative".
It has been much debated as to how close Marlow, his experiences and views are to those of Conrad himself.
Some have read Marlow as Conrad's alter ego, although it might be more accurate to understand Marlow as being a complex intermediary between author and text who "subtly directs the reader's response to his tale."
It is possible to suggest that Marlow is evidence of Conrad creating characters that resemble human beings; the character contradicts himself a number of times throughout the novel.
The most obvious example of such contradictions is how he exclaims: "I hate, detest, and can't bear a lie" yet first lies to the brickmaker, becoming "in an instant [...] a pretence," and more significantly, he lies at the end to Kurtz's Intended when he "laid the ghost of his [Kurtz] gifts at last with a lie".
Although a key character, it is debatable whether Kurtz is also a complex character.
The tale is told through Marlow's eyes, thus it is only ever his opinions that the reader hears.
However, as a construct he remains an important character in demonstrating the "the perversion of idealism that inevitably follows the obstinate and uncontrolled wish to achieve one's end."
Marlow functions as a commentator of Kurtz's demise attributing the "transformation from virtue to vice" to the fact that Kurtz's lacks "restraint".
Kurtz essentially internalises his "savage" surroundings, exposing his heroic reputation as a lie as the "wilderness seemed to draw him to a pitiless breast" like a dependent baby.
Heart of Darkness is ultimately a journey into the self, where by the "heart of darkness" is symbolic of both the unconscious and the Congo.
However, it might be argued that what lies beneath the surface consciousness of these characters is never truly exposed; rather Conrad's construction of characters serves to capture the mood of the time.
It is possible to suggest that the narrative of Mrs Dalloway in fact hinges on Woolf's illustrations consciousnesses within the novel's multitude of complex characters.
This essay previously referred to three central flaneurs, Clarissa, Septimus and Peter.
It might be argued that to some extent these characters are defined by the streets they walk; Clarissa walks in the fashionable shopping centre of Bond Street and is indeed herself a fashionable accessory to social and political power, represented by her husband; Peter journeys through areas of London which are all central and symbolic of imperial power, for example Victoria Street and Trafalgar Square.
What is perhaps more interesting when observing Woolf's character constructions, are the parallels that occur between Clarissa and Septimus.
Bradshaw suggests that these unfolding links are one of the novel's most "designed aspects" which give the narrative its "deeply organized" structure.
One of the dominant threads within the novel is the conflict that these characters share between themselves and the world outside them.
Both characters fuse together the internal and external; notions of the "self" and "other", in order to try and make sense of their own realities.
Clarissa sees herself as part of her surroundings: "She had the oddest sense of being herself invisible; unseen; unknown".
One might suggest that Clarissa's conflict is one of identity; a tension between being the Clarissa from the past, and fulfilling her societal role of Mrs Richard Dalloway.
Similarly, Septimus battles with his public role as a heroic war veteran and his private desire to be a student of literature and a poet.
Septimus's consciousness is further complicated by the shellshock, or hysteria from which he suffers, a condition supposed to occur only in women.
The minds of these characters seem to be "disordered in a similar manner", both of them probing the surface of the external world to find a means of resolving their personal conflicts; for Septimus this is found in death.
The fascinating construction of the consciousnesses of these characters gives rise to a vast number of questions about their identities, sexuality, and personal conflicts.
Furthermore, it essentially foregrounds the "psychological lesions and social schisms of London" as well as giving "an almost equally strong emphasis on the underlying communality of the city, the latent 'universal love'  which Septimus apprehends and in which Woolf passionately believed."
In conclusion to what is an extremely dense exploration of the creative techniques of both Woolf and Conrad's novels, it would seem suffice to suggest that the narrative and creative techniques evident in both texts, conventional or alternative, amount to two wonderfully "interesting stories".
What makes them "interesting" is perhaps not the overall "plot", but how they are constructed in order to achieve the popular modernist manifesto of "making new" the external world around us.
I enclose a sample chapter of my book Angel of the Night.
My book is aimed mainly at women aged 20 and above.
Detective Adam Belmayne is recovering from a recent divorce and decides to throw himself into his work.
The latest case is of a famous actor who has been brutally murdered in his home.
Following a suspicious suspect to Barbados, a beautiful and defiant Marie Clarendon, Belmayne searches for answers.
In this racy thriller, Belmayne struggles with his growing infatuation with Marie and with his fervent battle for the truth.
I can see my book fitting into your Hodder Headline imprints, among authors such as Sandra Brown and Charlotte Lamb, as my book combines racy crime writing with an element of romance.
My work also has the potential to become a serial with my main character Detective Adam Belmayne.
I currently study English at university and have had the opportunity to enter into various writing competitions and I have submitted several articles to a local school magazine in London.
I look forward to hearing from you in the near future.
Yours sincerely  A famous film star is brutally murdered in his London home.
Gary Jackson has had a long successful acting career and is constantly in the media, being portrayed as being sleazy and womanizing, despite being married.
Detective Adam Belmayne is on the case, still reeling from a recent divorce.
Determined and fierce, Belmayne puts all his energy into the case.
He is convinced that the prime suspect is Marie Clarendon, a woman seen many times in the company of Gary Jackson and is rumoured to have been one of his mistresses.
But Marie is quickly ticked off the list of suspects, when her alibi proves convincing to the police.
Jackson's wife, Clare is being held as the prime suspect and Marie is let off.
She travels to Barbados as part of a business trip with her brother Robert who is slightly younger than her.
Belmayne follows her there, convinced that there is more to Marie than she's letting on.
He still believes she played a major role in the murder of Gary Jackson.
Marie appears to be head-strong, defiant and aloof.
In Barbados, Belmayne questions Marie repeatedly, and finds that she doesn't give any clear answers, and her story constantly changes.
He delves into her private life and her history, trying to prove that she had a connection with the murder.
He witnesses Marie's strange relationship with her brother.
They have been very close since they were young, when Marie had to look after her brother while their mother worked.
They had no father.
Belmayne witnesses Marie's protectiveness of Robert and so finds it strange when he secretly finds them in heated arguments that he cannot understand.
On one occasion in Barbados, Belmayne feels the tension between Marie and Robert.
She tells him it was just an argument about work, but Belmayne suspects that there's something going on.
Robert then leaves to go back to London for a few days, leaving Marie and Belmayne on their own.
Belmayne finds himself slowly drawn to Marie, battling with his conscious about wanting to find the criminal and wanting to fall for her.
Meanwhile, Jackson's wife Clare is convincing the police that Marie had something to do with the murder.
Scheming and conniving, Clare tells them about Jackson's affair with Marie and how Marie got angry when Jackson told her that he wouldn't leave his wife for her.
Clare tells the police that Marie threatened him and Clare and that's how Clare found out about the affair.
News of this reaches Belmayne and he begins to fiercely interrogate Marie again.
Robert meets with a mystery lover in London, talking of Jackson's murder and the effect on the media.
Meanwhile, Belmayne travels back to London to question Clare.
He instantly recognizes Clare's guile and questions her for hours.
When he leaves, he is convinced that he knows who the murderer was.
Marie leaves Barbados and arrives back in London.
After another heated debate with Robert, she is visited by Belmayne who is acting angry and aggressive.
He unravels the case in front of her.
He admits to delving into her history and reveals that Jackson was Marie and Roberts's real father, which explains Marie's connection with him.
He admits that he knows about Roberts's affair with Clare Jackson and the conspiracy to murder her husband, which Robert did himself.
He explains why Marie kept altering her stories to confuse the police and protect her brother.
Robert kills himself, leaving Clare facing imprisonment.
Distraught and helpless, Marie leaves London and stays in a country home in Wales.
Belmayne follows her there where they begin to recover from the shock and trauma together.
610 words I looked down at his body and felt the bile creeping up my throat.
I could smell fresh blood.
My body began to convulse.
I forced myself to wipe the gun down and frantically stuff it into the back pocket of my jeans.
I knew exactly where to put it.
I crept closer to the bed and peered over him.
A mixture of elation and anguish overwhelmed me.
His blood was now soaking into the cream sheets and dripping on to the floor.
I stepped back as a small splash of blood almost caught my shoe.
I screwed my eyes shut tightly and sent a small prayer up to God.
"Forgive me," I whispered.
The glossy photograph showed the famous actor Gary Jackson spread-eagled on his large four poster bed.
His face had been gruesomely twisted into the satin sheets which were soaked in blood.
There were two bullet wounds.
One in his chest and one in his stomach.
Detective Adam Belmayne sighed and looked to the tabloid newspaper spread on his desk.
The same Gary Jackson looked back at him from a photograph.
He was good looking, despite his fifty-four years.
He was smiling, his dark eyes shining like wet slate.
He was sitting in a swanky London restaurant, dressed immaculately in a black pin striped suit.
The woman he was with was younger and strikingly beautiful.
She was looking into his face, her features twisted in what looked like anger or frustration.
Belmayne looked over his desk at the interrogation room where the same woman was being questioned.
She still had that aloof, defiant look in her eyes.
She caught him looking and held her stare until Belmayne looked away uncomfortably.
He read the article in the tabloid which referred to the woman as Gary Jackson's mistress.
It was possible.
She was young and beautiful and had been spotted several times with him.
She was certainly not the first of Jackson's mistresses.
He took a sip of his steaming coffee, clutching the Styrofoam cup in his hands and staring at the photograph of a different woman on his desk.
She was smiling warmly, her chocolate brown eyes soft and slightly squinted in that way he loved.
Her hand was in the middle of flicking strands of hair away from her face.
Belmayne shut his eyes.
How had it gone wrong?
A flurry of activity in the interrogation room caught his eye and he stood up, placing his cup of coffee back onto his desk.
Chief Inspector Brian Coleridge walked out of the room and over to Belmayne.
"She's clean," he said.
"Was spending the evening with a friend.
Cheryl York.
We've spoken to her."
"She was top of the list," Belmayne protested.
"Her alibi is water tight."
Coleridge replied.
"On to the wife."
Belmayne watched him walk away and felt eyes boring into the back of his head.
He turned swiftly and caught the woman's eye.
She was still sitting in the interrogation room.
And she was staring right at him.
He didn't waver this time.
He stared straight back at her.
Her eyes seemed to flicker and then she looked away.
He smiled to himself.
He definitely noticed fear in her eyes.
Marie Clarendon climbed the stairs of her London flat two at a time.
She clutched the plane tickets tightly to her chest, banishing the memory of that morning from her mind.
She fished in her bag for her mobile phone and dialled Robert's number.
It went to answer phone.
Swearing under her breath, she turned the key in the lock and slammed the door behind her.
She gasped when she noticed her house-sitter Mimi sitting with a man in the living room.
The same man that was at the police station that morning.
Mimi stood up unsteadily.
"Sorry Miss Clarendon.
.
.
the man.
.
.he with the police .
.
."
she stuttered in her Bulgarian accent.
The man stood up and pulled his ID from his blazer pocket.
"Detective Adam Belmayne," he offered firmly.
Marie nodded at Mimi to leave the room.
She set her bag down on the floor beside the couches and placed the flight tickets on a nearby table.
She remained standing, her hands on her hips.
Belmayne noticed that she looked flushed.
Like she had been running.
"What can I do for you detective?"
she asked, impatiently.
"I just have some questions for you."
He replied.
Her eyes flashed.
"I've already been questioned.
And I was let off."
"It won't take long Miss Clarendon.
If you could just sit down."
Belmayne said.
"I really don't have the time detective," she replied resolutely.
"I have to start packing."
She walked over to the kitchen, leading off from the living room.
Belmayne followed her.
The kitchen was bright, the walls adorned with 1920's prints of Parisian coffee shops and café's.
"I don't think you can leave the country."
Belmayne said, picking up the plane tickets that she had placed on the coffee table.
"Why not?"
she called from the kitchen.
"I wasn't told that I couldn't and besides.
.
."
she walked out holding a glass of water.
".
.
.I have to go.
For work."
Belmayne looked at her.
Her eyes were the colour of whiskey.
"And what is it that you do?"
he asked, looking down at the tickets, heading for Barbados.
"I have my own marketing company.
We market hotels in the Caribbean."
"Sounds glamorous."
"You'd think."
She replied, taking another long swig of water.
She raised her eyebrows at him questioningly.
She cocked her head slightly, studying the man before her.
He was tall, lean, good looking in a clean-cut, boyish sort of way.
But his jaw was set, his eyes probing and sharp.
And she noticed lines on his forehead.
Lines that seemed to have been there a while.
"How did you know Gary Jackson?"
Belmayne asked, still holding the tickets.
Marie sighed loudly and placed the glass of water down on the coffee table, leaving a ring of water on the mahogany wood.
"I've already answered all of these questions," she replied shortly.
"And I've already said, I don't have time to answer any more.
I'm leaving for Barbados tomorrow morning with my brother."
"Your brother?"
"Yes.
He works with me."
Belmayne nodded and handed her the tickets.
"Sorry for taking up your time Miss Clarendon."
He said, making his way towards the door.
She nodded stiffly.
He turned round before leaving.
"What part of Barbados are you going to, Miss Clarendon?"
he asked.
She frowned.
He noticed her lips quiver slightly.
"Christchurch.
Why?"
He smiled.
"Just wondering."
Belmayne pushed his gear into reverse.
His mind was reeling.
She had been shifty.
Her eyes were untrusting.
There was definitely more to Marie Clarendon.
He made a mental note to look up her brother and cursed when he realised that he hadn't asked for his name.
As he eased the black Audi from his parking space, his mobile phone began to vibrate in the pocket of his blazer.
"Yes?"
he answered impatiently.
"Belmayne, what are you doing?"
Coleridge barked into the phone.
"I was questioning Marie Clarendon."
He replied.
He heard Coleridge sigh softly.
"What for?
Look, we're onto Clare Jackson, so just forget about Clarendon and - " "Brian, I think this woman is hiding something!"
Belmayne protested.
"Forget it Adam, she had an alibi.
She didn't kill Gary Jackson."
"But she might know something."
Coleridge breathed heavily into the phone.
"Adam," he said, exasperated, "Just get down here."
A famous film star is brutally murdered in his London home.
Gary Jackson has had a long successful acting career and is constantly in the media, being portrayed as being sleazy and womanizing, despite being married.
Detective Adam Belmayne is on the case, still reeling from a recent divorce.
Determined and fierce, Belmayne puts all his energy into the case.
He is convinced that the prime suspect is Marie Clarendon, a woman seen many times in the company of Gary Jackson and is rumoured to have been one of his mistresses.
But Marie is quickly ticked off the list of suspects, when her alibi proves convincing to the police.
She was with a friend the night of Jackson's murder Jackson's wife, Clare is being held as the prime suspect and Marie is let off.
She travels to Barbados as part of a business trip with her brother Robert who is slightly younger than her.
She has her own marketing company for hotels in the Caribbean.
Belmayne follows her there, convinced that there is more to Marie than she's letting on.
He still believes she played a major role in the murder of Gary Jackson.
Marie appears to be head-strong, defiant and aloof.
In Barbados, Belmayne questions Marie repeatedly, and finds that she doesn't give any clear answers, and her story constantly changes.
He delves into her private life and her history, trying to prove that she had a connection with the murder.
He witnesses Marie's strange relationship with her brother.
They have been very close since they were young, when Marie had to look after her brother while their mother worked.
They had no father.
Belmayne witnesses Marie's protectiveness of Robert and so finds it strange when he secretly finds them in heated arguments that he cannot understand.
On one occasion in Barbados, Belmayne feels the tension between Marie and Robert.
She tells him it was just an argument about work, but Belmayne suspects that there's something going on.
Robert then leaves to go back to London for a few days, leaving Marie and Belmayne on their own.
Belmayne finds himself slowly drawn to Marie, battling with his conscious about wanting to find the criminal and wanting to fall for her.
Meanwhile, Jackson's wife Clare is convincing the police that Marie had something to do with the murder.
Scheming and conniving, Clare tells them about Jackson's affair with Marie and how Marie got angry when Jackson told her that he wouldn't leave his wife for her.
Clare tells the police that Marie threatened him and Clare and that's how Clare found out about the affair.
News of this reaches Belmayne and he begins to fiercely interrogate Marie again.
Robert meets with a mystery lover in London, talking of Jackson's murder and the effect on the media.
Meanwhile, Belmayne travels back to London to question Clare.
He instantly recognizes Clare's guile and questions her for hours.
When he leaves, he is convinced that he knows who the murderer was.
Marie leaves Barbados and arrives back in London.
After another heated debate with Robert, she is visited by Belmayne who is acting angry and aggressive.
He unravels the case in front of her.
He admits to delving into her history and reveals that Jackson was Marie and Roberts's real father, which explains Marie's connection with him.
He admits that he knows about Roberts's affair with Clare Jackson and the conspiracy to murder her husband, which Robert did himself.
He explains why Marie kept altering her stories to confuse the police and protect her brother.
Robert kills himself, leaving Clare facing imprisonment.
Distraught and helpless, Marie leaves London and stays in a country home in Wales.
Belmayne follows her there where they begin to recover from the shock and trauma together.
I looked down at his body and felt the bile creeping up my throat.
I could smell fresh blood.
My body began to convulse.
I forced myself to wipe the gun down and frantically stuff it into the back pocket of my jeans.
I knew exactly where to put it.
I crept closer to the bed and peered over him.
A mixture of elation and anguish overwhelmed me.
His blood was now soaking into the cream sheets and dripping on to the floor.
I stepped back as a small splash of blood almost caught my shoe.
I screwed my eyes shut tightly and sent a small prayer up to God.
"Forgive me," I whispered.
The glossy photograph showed the famous actor Gary Jackson spread-eagled on his large four poster bed.
His face had been gruesomely twisted into the satin sheets which were soaked in blood.
There were two bullet wounds.
One in his chest and one in his stomach.
Detective Adam Belmayne sighed and looked to the tabloid newspaper spread on his desk.
The same Gary Jackson looked back at him from a photograph.
He was good looking, despite his fifty-four years.
He was smiling, his dark eyes shining like wet slate.
He was sitting in a swanky London restaurant, dressed immaculately in a black pin striped suit.
The woman he was with was younger and strikingly beautiful.
She was looking into his face, her features twisted in what looked like anger or frustration.
Belmayne looked over his desk at the interrogation room where the same woman was being questioned.
She still had that aloof, defiant look in her eyes.
She caught him looking and held her stare until Belmayne looked away uncomfortably.
He read the article in the tabloid which referred to the woman as Gary Jackson's mistress.
It was possible.
She was young and beautiful and had been spotted several times with him.
She was certainly not the first of Jackson's mistresses.
He took a sip of his steaming coffee, clutching the Styrofoam cup in his hands and staring at the photograph of a different woman on his desk.
She was smiling warmly, her chocolate brown eyes soft and slightly squinted in that way he loved.
Her hand was in the middle of flicking strands of hair away from her face.
Belmayne shut his eyes.
How had it gone wrong?
A flurry of activity in the interrogation room caught his eye and he stood up, placing his cup of coffee back onto his desk.
Chief Inspector Brian Coleridge walked out of the room and over to Belmayne.
"She's clean," he said.
"Was spending the evening with a friend.
Cheryl York.
We've spoken to her."
"She was top of the list," Belmayne protested.
"Her alibi is water tight."
Coleridge replied.
"On to the wife."
Belmayne watched him walk away and felt eyes boring into the back of his head.
He turned swiftly and caught the woman's eye.
She was still sitting in the interrogation room.
And she was staring right at him.
He didn't waver this time.
He stared straight back at her.
Her eyes seemed to flicker and then she looked away.
He smiled to himself.
He definitely noticed fear in her eyes.
Marie Clarendon climbed the stairs of her London flat two at a time.
She clutched the plane tickets tightly to her chest, banishing the memory of that morning from her mind.
She fished in her bag for her mobile phone and dialled Robert's number.
It went to answer phone.
Swearing under her breath, she turned the key in the lock and slammed the door behind her.
She gasped when she noticed her house-sitter Mimi sitting with a man in the living room.
The same man that was at the police station that morning.
Mimi stood up unsteadily.
"Sorry Miss Clarendon.
.
.
the man.
.
.he with the police .
.
."
she stuttered in her Bulgarian accent.
The man stood up and pulled his ID from his blazer pocket.
"Detective Adam Belmayne," he offered firmly.
Marie nodded at Mimi to leave the room.
She set her bag down on the floor beside the couches and placed the flight tickets on a nearby table.
She remained standing, her hands on her hips.
Belmayne noticed that she looked flushed.
Like she had been running.
"What can I do for you detective?"
she asked, impatiently.
"I just have some questions for you."
He replied.
Her eyes flashed.
"I've already been questioned.
And I was let off."
"It won't take long Miss Clarendon.
If you could just sit down."
Belmayne said.
"I really don't have the time detective," she replied resolutely.
"I have to start packing."
She walked over to the kitchen, leading off from the living room.
Belmayne followed her.
The kitchen was bright, the walls adorned with 1920's prints of Parisian coffee shops and café's.
"I don't think you can leave the country."
Belmayne said, picking up the plane tickets that she had placed on the coffee table.
"Why not?"
she called from the kitchen.
"I wasn't told that I couldn't and besides.
.
."
she walked out holding a glass of water.
".
.
.I have to go.
For work."
Belmayne looked at her.
Her eyes were the colour of whiskey.
"And what is it that you do?"
he asked, looking down at the tickets, heading for Barbados.
"I have my own marketing company.
We market hotels in the Caribbean."
"Sounds glamorous."
"You'd think."
She replied, taking another long swig of water.
She raised her eyebrows at him questioningly.
She cocked her head slightly, studying the man before her.
He was tall, lean, good looking in a clean-cut, boyish sort of way.
But his jaw was set, his eyes probing and sharp.
And she noticed lines on his forehead.
Lines that seemed to have been there a while.
"How did you know Gary Jackson?"
Belmayne asked, still holding the tickets.
Marie sighed loudly and placed the glass of water down on the coffee table, leaving a ring of water on the mahogany wood.
"I've already answered all of these questions," she replied shortly.
"And I've already said, I don't have time to answer any more.
I'm leaving for Barbados tomorrow morning with my brother."
"Your brother?"
"Yes.
He works with me."
Belmayne nodded and handed her the tickets.
"Sorry for taking up your time Miss Clarendon."
He said, making his way towards the door.
She nodded stiffly.
He turned round before leaving.
"What part of Barbados are you going to, Miss Clarendon?"
he asked.
She frowned.
He noticed her lips quiver slightly.
"Christchurch.
Why?"
He smiled.
"Just wondering."
Belmayne pushed his gear into reverse.
His mind was reeling.
She had been shifty.
Her eyes were untrusting.
There was definitely more to Marie Clarendon.
He made a mental note to look up her brother and cursed when he realised that he hadn't asked for his name.
As he eased the black Audi from his parking space, his mobile phone began to vibrate in the pocket of his blazer.
"Yes?"
he answered impatiently.
"Belmayne, what are you doing?"
Coleridge barked into the phone.
"I was questioning Marie Clarendon."
He replied.
He heard Coleridge sigh softly.
"What for?
Look, we're onto Clare Jackson, so just forget about Clarendon and - " "Brian, I think this woman is hiding something!"
Belmayne protested.
"Forget it Adam, she had an alibi.
She didn't kill Gary Jackson."
"But she might know something."
Coleridge breathed heavily into the phone.
"Adam," he said, exasperated, "Just get down here."
The First Men on Mercury, by Edwin Morgan is in dialogue form, seemingly between an inhabitant of Mercury, and a person from Earth who has approached them.
The speech between the two people begins with the person from Earth and invites the inhabitant of Mercury to cooperate by using a question in line two.
From as early as this it is clear that the text is concerning with people understanding one another, as this question is engaging with the second character, yet it is concerned further with the other and what guidance they can provide one another.
During the early stages of the text it is easy for the reader to differentiate because the two speakers, as their language is very different from eachother; at line three the language of the Mercury inhabitant emerges and this is starkly different to the English.
Interestingly, though, even when the languages are so different early on, the Mercury inhabitant still poses a question and with the use of the question mark the reader is able to understand even slightly what is happening in the situation.
Both parties here seem confused as the next speaker , delegates another question.
This process is continued throughout the text, only reinforcing how this is concerning with understanding between unfamiliar languages.
The speech is arranged into various stresses, with the repeated use of exclamation marks and the visual representation of what is happening in the scene is full of action in their speech.
Words are often highlighted with the use of speech marks to show how the speaker would be emphasising the word with their own speech and reassuring the reader of what is important.
The use of speech marks also shows that the other speaker whom the first is addressing perhaps doesn't understand what they are saying, and by somehow enhancing it would make it easier for them.
A good example of this is in 11-14, where the English speaker repeatedly stresses the words that seem important, like 'land', 'sea', and 'men'.
However it appears that this process has not enlightened the inhabitant of Mercury, as their response is only to question again in line 12 .
Following this, though, there appears to be a bridge of understanding at line 20 when the Mercurian repeats the sound made by 'leader' and transfers it into something which can be understood by them with 'yuleeda'.
This poses the question as to whether or not words are defined by the ability to copy the sound they make or to understand their meaning and where the meaning is inherited from.
After this turn at line 20, and the speech just after it becomes increasingly difficult to keep track of who the speaker is.
Whatsmore, because neither of the speakers have names it is seemingly left for the reader to interpret and monitor the dialogue themselves.
The speech between lines 24 and 34 becomes quite confusing because it is almost all undecipherable, and is mixed between languages apart from phrases which occasionally emerge in English like 'there is no more talk'  and the rare word strewn between what one must assume is the language of the Mercurian.
The person who has invaded this planet , have quickly acquired the language of those which they intended to conquer.
This brings many connotations of power, the acquisition of language and ownership of people to mind because when people invade a country their language tends to take over, however the invaders appear not to have much power here as it is the Mercurians who have the dominance with language and the people from Earth are sent back , perhaps unfulfilled by what they have learnt.
John Agard's poem, Listen Mr Oxford Don deals with a similar subject matter but in a far more personal and recognisable way.
Listen Mr Oxford Don is split into eight sections, of varying length and with rhyme that is repeated throughout.
The first verse begins with the speaker introducing themselves directly, and using a double negative as a way to describe them , this introduction is giving insight to how the speaker will keep describing themselves by comparisons to things which are usually considering negative.
There is rhyme within the first verse which pairs the first and third line together, and separately associates the second, forth and fifth; the use of this would be to compare what each line is concerned with, i.e comparing a graduate to an immigrant, which 4 and 5 do.
The combination of rhyme and the colloquialisms of speech create strong rhythm throughout this poem, sped up in the second verse where all the lines follow an a,a,a,a, rhyme scheme which makes them quicker to read as they flow on from one another and have a defined relationship.
The colloquialisms also manage to show how the speaker has distorted the language , which has been imposed upon him, for his own use and to express himself better.
There is also a slight indication in the colloquialisms that the speaker may have a Jamaican accent, as some readers may be familiar with how the Jamaican accent pronounces 'th' as 'd'; this is written from line 7 and continues throughout.
Notably there is also no use of punctuation in this text, and this could have been purposefully done because Listen Mr Oxford Don is meant to be performance poetry, and therefore the marking of punctuation would make it more difficult for individuals to perform it in their own way.
Also it could be that John Agard is reinforcing his point of claiming back language and that written punctuation is irrelevant in the speech of language.
Strangely though, the use of capital letters is still present when declaring proper nouns throughout.
John Agard repeatedly introduces the speaker with 'I' and makes sure that the reader is aware of how conscious the speaker is of themself and what they want to achieve with the statements they make.
There is also a clear relationship marked out between stanza two  and stanza five .
Primarily this relationship is outlined by the connection of rhyme scheme, but on closer inspection it is clear how these sections relate to one another; they mark the turns in the poem.
The first turn appears at the end of the second stanza with the introduction of danger, and this theme is carried on to the next two sections before stanza five where there is a line repeated to mark the similarities and the break .
After line 21 the stanzas get longer and the language becomes less involved with violence and more with peacefulness and humanness, the notion that a person can be civil and humane without having to be English.
The speaker than goes on to claim that the violent acts he may have committed against language were in self defence ; self defence perhaps against the oppressiveness and authority of the English language on someone, especially someone who has not inherited it's goodness.
Interesting as the reader develops a relationship with the poem there seem little or no need for punctuation, and the reader is able to adapt the way the words appear to be spoken to suit them.
I think this is the essence of what John Agard is encouraging people to do when reading this poem, and is what he is professing has not happened to him in his experience of acquiring a language which promotes what is 'proper' and in turn making the speaker property of the language and not the language property of the speaker.
My response to these two texts was a short poem continuing on the theme which John Agard introduced in Listen Mr Oxford Don.
I felt that the acquisition and the authority of language is something which is very familiar to me, as a student, as language is changing and as a woman.
The ownership of language or its ownership of the speaker is a theme that has been troublesome to woman and people who have been oppressed for a long time because it seems like a struggle to develop one's own voice and language.
Therefore with my response I was trying to illustrate how misunderstanding of eachother, and sometimes fear and result in people missing the most beautiful part of language; and that is, that it is able to change and it can mean something to every individual despite it's ability to be uniting for a large group.
In this poem the speaker is voicing their opinion on how others view them, and how their developments and way of life sometimes come across as dangerous, but this is only because they have not been given the chance to be understood.
Slang is often thought of a lesser language and is even a derogatory term to refer the language of someone who is lower class, a teenager, or an ethic minority.
All of the current connotations to slang are very negative, yet this is simply because people don't understand and are therefore afraid of those who use it.
This poem is showing that slang is a positive development in the English language, which makes it more accessible to people and allows them to be liberated not oppressed by it; slang is the language of people who may sometimes feel like they have no voice.
I have used punctuation in this poem, and I have used capital letters in conventional places, and in doing so I was trying to show how slang and proper English can work alongside one another.
The voice here is of only one speaker, yet the use of 'bruv', 'bredren', 'yard' and 'ends' shows how this language is common among the speaker and his close friends and family.
There is no purposeful rhyme in this poem because I felt that the feature was the words and they relate to eachother and have strong rhythm without the over complications of rhyme.
"Pan Recipe" is a Caribbean poem written as an extended metaphor, which uses the vehicle of the steel pan to convey a sense of new life born out of the past, and is suggestive of the oppression of black slaves.
When I began writing "How we have walked, How we have journeyed", I aimed to re-centre Agard's text and focus more primarily on the Caribbean music itself, as a celebration of freedom, but still express ideas about the oppression of black slaves through metaphor.
"How we have walked, How we have journeyed" should, like "Pan Recipe", be read on both a literal and metaphorical level.
The title itself works on both of these levels, and directs the reader to acknowledge the metaphorical tenor through the first person present plural pronoun "we".
This deictic suggests that the poem is also about a number of people collectively participating in the acts of "walking" and "journeying".
On a literal level this might be related to the way in which large masses of people "walk" and "journey", perhaps in a carnival parade.
The use of the past tense in the title might also suggest a metaphorical journey through time; the use of the perfect present forms of both verbs indicates that the journey, both literal and metaphorical, has come to an end.
I wanted the poem to have a strong, driving rhythm to imitate the rhythms of Caribbean music and give it a sense of progression.
This drive comes largely from the use of continuous present verbs throughout the poem.
In the first verse, for example, the pre-modifying adjectives "flaming" and "flashing" are the non-finite progressive participles of active, and dynamic, verbs, giving a sense of moving forward towards an end.
This end is indicated initially in the use of the past tense in the title of the poem.
Furthermore, the final verse of the poem moves into the past tense through the past participle "fought".
This internal deviation gives the last lines a sense of finality and conclusion.
"New World A-Comin" also works with both the present and past tenses to similar effect.
The opening lines of the poem are written in the present tense, indicated by the repeated use of the demonstrative article, "this", which gives a sense of immediacy.
In line five the text moves into the past tense, through the past participle "met".
At this point the text also introduces context sensitive pronouns .
This is echoed in "How we have walked, How we have journeyed", when in the final line of the ninth verse, the refrain is altered by replacing the definite article "the" with the plural possessive pronoun "our".
In both poems, this internal deviation takes the text to a human level.
In "How we have walked, How we have journeyed" it also makes more perceptually prominent the metaphorical level on which the poem is working.
My poem also uses paralleled phrase structures, as do both of the poems it draws upon.
Parallelism is used as a larger structural feature of the text through the repetition and variation of the refrain.
On a more localised level, the phrase structure of the first two lines might be used as examples of such textual patterning.
Both lines are noun phrases with one pre-modifying continuous present adjectival verb preceding a noun, both lines consisting of just two words.
This structure is repeated in the first line of the second verse, and later in line two of verse ten .
In "New World A-Comin'" the extensive use of parallelism in this way acts as is a cohesive device, which helps us to construct meaning from a largely fragmented framework, for example in the first four lines.
"How we have walked, How we have journeyed" uses lexical deviation through graphological deviation, for example in verse four.
As a result of enjambment, the function of the word "surdo" is unclear.
"Surdo is the bass drum that is used to keep the rhythm together and to provide the deep bass tones" in Brazilian music.
However, due to the line break and lack of punctuation, there are several functional possibilities.
Both "Solid" and "surdo" could be read as pre-modifying adjectives, with "beat" acting as a noun head within the phrase.
It is also possible to read "surdo" as the noun, pre-modified by the adjective "Solid".
This in turn would change the function of the word "beat" from the noun head to a non-finite active verb, with "Samba", compounded with "rhythm" in the next line, acting as the direct object, or noun head.
This technique is a prominent feature in "New World A-Comin", where there are many examples of words which could have several meanings and functions, often consequent of graphological deviation, for example lines 1-3.
The line break between "this"  and "leader"  makes us question the functions of both words; it is unclear as to whether "this" should be read as a demonstrative article or demonstrative noun.
If we take the former function, "leader" would be read as the pre-modified noun object of the phrase - a "Helpless.../leader"; if we take the latter "leader becomes adjectival and, if read as being hyphenated with "less" into a compound adjective , becomes part of a second simile.
It is likely to be the latter if we look at the paralleled structures between these lines and the repetition of "-less" as a suffix.
However, the syntax between lines two and three also confuses the word functions of both "leader"  and "less" .
This mode of foregrounding through deviation reoccurs frequently throughout the poem, particularly at the beginning of the second verse.
I have also experimented with this technique, for example lines 29 - 34, where the phrase structure could work in several ways as a result of enjambment.
Another key example of foregrounding through graphological deviation in "How we have walked, How we have journeyed", is the way in which the first three refrains break, or "fight", the rhythm; the form, here, aids meaning: "native sticks / fighting / the rhythm."
The use of full rhyme in the final refrain, and an eventual adherence to the rhythm established by the verses, aids the feeling of finality indicated by the fore mentioned use of the past tense.
This is also similar to "New World A-Comin", where the text is broken at the end of line 11 through the use of enjambment; the use of the colon adds to the sense of "silence".
Both of the poems from which I have drawn use semantic deviation through the application of animating verbs and adjectives to non-animate objects.
In lines 19 and 20 of "New World A-Comin'" the adjectives "firm" and "fleshed" pre-modify the noun "flame", giving it human or animal like qualities.
I have used this throughout my poem, particularly in the repeated refrain, where the animate verb, "fighting", is applied to the non-animate subject of the phrase, "sticks".
Furthermore, this is pre-modified by the adjective "native", which we might usually associate with "people".
In line 7 of "Pan Recipe" the use of the present simple verb "stifle" animates the "drum", since a drum does not play itself.
The verb is usually used in reference to the suppression, curbing, suffocation, or repression of a person or animal.
The effect is similar to the use of such semantic deviation in "How we have walked, How we have journeyed", whereby the "native sticks" need a human agent in order for them to be "fighting".
We might, then, in both poems, take the "drum", or "sticks" to represent the music of the "people".
Music is an abstract noun which, in a sense, is alive or animate when we can hear it.
In "Pan Recipe" our reading would mean the stifling of the music which itself is symbolic of the "people"; and in "How we have walked, How we have journeyed", it might be read as a metaphor of the people themselves fighting their oppression.
"How we have walked, How we have journeyed" also demonstrates a use of deliberate grammatical deviation in the form of ellipsis.
Agard uses this in "Pan Recipe", for example in line 5, where the indefinite article is missing between the verb and the pre-modifying adjectival noun.
, which is mimetic of the dialect of English-speaking Caribbean people.
In terms of genre this might then be considered as an Anglophonic text, whereby the use of language is used to articulate identity; where identity is expressed in terms of opposition or distinction.
Through this technique, the micro-textual level of the poem indicates the broader macro-textual issue of identity to which the poem metaphorically points.
In my poem, I aimed to imitate this technique of language being mimetic of dialect in order to "emphasise the social and historical constructedness of [...] relations and the political power  those relations entail", between the oppressed and those who oppress.
The use of ellipsis to reflect a particular dialect demonstrates how language, as used in a society, defines - to an extent - identity.
This then foregrounds the macro-textual and metaphorical level on which the text is working.
The extended figurative structure of "Pan Recipe" is further complicated by the use of the term "Recipe", and the semantic language and clause structures associated with cooking.
The phrase structures focus upon the use of imperative verbs, as used in recipe instructions.
Moreover, they are linked by sequencing devices, for example "First"  and "Then" .
Similarly, I wanted to incorporate structural devices from another genre in order to emphasise the musical celebration of freedom.
The poem takes the structural form of a song with two regular four line verses followed by a repeated, although later varied, refrain.
In order to be more specific, I have used a rich variety of language semantically related to the instruments, rhythms, and dances from Cuba and Brazil.
These exotic names will be unfamiliar to most readers, and thus, like the use of dialect, they give a sense of identity through distinction.
In two instances, the exotic nature of the instruments is foregrounded by means of synecdoche, or metonymy, for example in line three "coconut" refers to the material from which maracas are made.
Lines 3 and 4 of verse 8 point to the qualities of a "good" bongo ; these qualities also create a powerful metaphoric image of strength.
One of the dominant cohesive devices used in both "Pan Recipe" and "New World A-Comin" is that of sound patterning.
In lines 7-13 of "New World A-Comin'" the use of alliteration and sibilance is mimetic of the "silence" in line 11.
The repetition of the unvoiced fricative /f/ and unvoiced sibilant /s/ also slows down the rhythm of the text.
In verse two of the poem, the repetition of the fricative /f/ works in a very different way.
The way in which the air flow is not stopped in this alliterative passage gives it a sense of heightened action.
In the opening two lines of my poem, I have also used alliteration of the fricative /f/, in an attempt to achieve a similar effect of dynamic action and life, in order to suggest the lively rhythms, colours and atmosphere of carnival.
In "Pan Recipe" Agard also uses alliteration to generate rhythm.
The repetition of bilabial plosives  in lines three and five, emphasise the "pain" Agard is trying to convey, and echo the brutal acts to which the extended metaphor relates; the alliteration brings out the anger the persona of the poem expresses about the treatment of Caribbean people.
This is added to by Agard's use of internal rhyme in lines three and four.
The repetition of the diphthong /ɔi/  draws out these lines and thus emphasises the sense of time suggested earlier in line two "simmer for centuries".
The sibilance in verse four also works in this way as does the repetition of both the sibilant /s/ and bilabial plosive /b/, in verse ten, among other examples.
I have also used rhyme and half rhyme throughout the poem to aid rhythm and pace.
In verse one, the half rhyme between lines two and four set a rhythmic pattern which is enhanced by the full rhyme in the second verse .
The final two verses, and refrain, contain full rhymes between the second and fourth lines which aid the driving rhythm to give the final lines a sense of finality.
In a most crucial and pivotal chapter in Jane Austen's 'Emma', the protagonist of the novel is 'forcibly struck' by self-realisation due to the consequences of her own unforgivable behaviour towards 'poor' Miss Bates.
The chapter of study is Chapter VII in Volume III.
This central idea of self-realisation and personal understanding is a constant theme running throughout 'Emma', standing out especially in this particular chapter.
The same theme can be found similarly in Shakespeare's 'The Winter's Tale'.
Act 3, Scene 2 is a highly significant scene in this respect as it is a climatic point in the play when Leontes realises his mistakes and begins on the path to self- knowledge: What other themes and ideas does this specific scene deal with and how is it significant to the play as a whole?
Just how important is Chapter VII, Volume III of 'Emma' to the respective narrative overall?
And how do these two texts differ in their organisation of the story?
In the chosen chapter from 'Emma', we, the reader, witness a less attractive and crueller side to Emma as she humiliates Miss Bates at a picnic on Box Hill.
In a 'good-humoured' way, the latter tells the group she can easily talk about '"three things very dull indeed"'.
Emma responds to this remark in a spiteful and sarcastic fashion: Emma thinks nothing of her hurtful remark and is only made aware of the damage she has caused at the end of the chapter by Mr. Knightley, who clearly points out the harm she has done: '"It was badly done, indeed!"'
Once again it is the father figure of Mr. Knightley who reprimands Emma's bad behaviour out of genuine concern for her.
Knightley is constantly guiding Emma and is 'one of the few people who could see faults' in her.
An example of this occurs as early on as the opening chapter in a discussion between himself and Emma about her part in Mr Weston and Miss Taylor's 'match': It seems that this 'sensible' character is acting as a mouth piece for Austen's and the reader's own viewpoint as he tells Emma the obvious, moral way of acting.
In a sense he is her teacher of moral education, which is another theme of this nineteenth century novel.
Another point in the novel where Emma has a moment of self- realisation is when Mr. Elton's feelings become clear about who he prefers, Emma not Harriet, in Chapter XV, Volume I: This surprising turn of events causes Emma to rethink her actions and behaviour and forces her to continue the journey of self- understanding.
In 'The Winter's Tale', Act 3, Scene 2 is a highly important scene as it is the play's tragic climax and turning point.
Leontes feels that there is no recovery for his actions but only a path of misery and gloom represented by the winter's oppressive dark: However there is still some hope it seems in the Oracle's message, which ends with: There appears to be a glimmer of hope in the possibility of finding the heir.
After Act 3, the play completely shifts mood, as sixteen years passes between this and the following Act to contrast the difference more emphatically.
The winter becomes the spring.
The change of season signals hope, as spring is a conventional image of youth and regeneration, supporting the idea that all is not lost.
This splitting up of the play explains the term tragicomedy.
In comparison, at the end of Chapter VII, Volume III, Emma feels she has reached her lowest point and reveals 'she never had been so depressed':'Time did not compose her.
As she reflected more, she seemed but to feel it more'.
In both texts however this 'grief' and 'mortification' have to be felt on both characters' parts for the self-realisation and understanding to occur.
The particular sections I have chosen from each piece of literature therefore are it appears the beginning of self-knowledge rather than a tragic end.
Chapter VII, Volume III is the most emotional and dramatic chapter concerning the feelings and thoughts of Emma the reader has yet seen.
Due to the disapproval of Knightley, Emma actually sheds 'tears' at the end of the chapter.
Austen uses direct narrative to portray Emma's true feelings and describes the situation through Emma's perspective.
Even though the omniscient narrator uses third person, the reader feels closely related to Emma at this point in the novel as the language used is that of which one can imagine Emma using herself.
The reader feels as though they are looking into Emma's mind and can immediately observe what her thoughts are.
Due to the surprising misery Knightley's reprimand has on Emma, it is perhaps this specific point in the novel when Emma's feelings towards Knightley are made clear to the reader and even to herself.
It is obvious how highly she regards Knightley's opinions and due to this idea, this chapter may mark the turning point and the beginning to the path of self- understanding and lead her to what she really desires.
In parallel, Leontes in Act 3, Scene 2, realises his awful mistakes and therefore can move forward from these.
It is the almighty power of Apollo however that forces the King of Sicilia to realise his errors of judgement.
For both characters, Emma and Leontes, it takes an outside force to make them realise their mistakes.
In the chosen chapter in Austen's novel, the idea of social status is brought into the frame, as the difference between certain characters is illuminated, especially between Emma and Miss Bates.
One critic, Adela Pinch, states that Emma 'learns of her potential to abuse her social position'.
There is a clear divide as Knightley points out: The obvious class distinction between Miss Bates and Emma reveals to the reader that not all females of the time in which Jane Austen lived were privileged 'rich, handsome and clever' like our central character.
Miss Bates, a single woman faces harsh realities, similarly does Jane Fairfax who is forced to work as a governess due to lack of money.
Likewise, one could argue that the idea of status and hierarchy are also a prominent feature of the trial scene in 'The Winter's Tale'.
At the beginning of the scene King Leontes is all-powerful, individually constructing the consequences of the trial if his beliefs are made true: But it soon prevails that Apollo, a higher power than even a King, has the control of the situation as Leontes' son drops down 'dead' due to the 'great profaneness' of the King.
Another similarity between the two different texts is the idea that misinterpretation, imagination and jealousy are linked and also act as separate themes in both pieces of literature.
Leontes in Act 3, Scene 2 is described as 'a jealous tyrant' before admitting 'I have too much believed mine own suspicion'.
Leontes is jealous of an adulterous relationship he believes his old friend Polixenes and his wife Hermione are having due to his misinterpretations.
As early on in the play as Act 1, Scene 2 his seemingly unfounded jealousy is revealed, his over-imagination causing him to believe the adultery sincerely: In the Box Hill scene, which I have chosen, Emma's imagination again leads to misunderstanding when she believes Frank Churchill could have feelings for Harriet: This specific chapter is brimming with false readings such as Knightley's false reading of Emma and Frank Churchill's relationship and everyone's misunderstanding of Jane Fairfax and Frank Churchill's relationship.
Austen uses irony in this key chapter as a device to emphasise this on-running theme.
For example the statement made by Frank Churchill: is heavily ironic because if Miss Woodhouse truly did know what everyone was thinking, there would be no room for misinterpretation and less harm caused.
A recurring motif in Emma is that of parties and social gatherings.
The Box Hill episode is a prime example of this.
Austen uses this idea as a representation of the society as a whole, a microcosm of society.
The picnic is an intense way of looking at the interactions between characters.
This remark from Mrs Elton at the picnic reveals her attitude on a larger scale than just the controlling of events at the gathering on Box Hill.
She believes herself to be of higher status than Emma and feels if anyone were in control of events it would be herself.
In these social events, that 'save Highbury' from a life in 'moribund', it is not only easier for the reader to witness the interaction and personality of the people involved but also characters involved can observe the relationships of others.
Another point to note is the fact the reader is never taken outside of the village of Highbury.
This enclosed feeling gives a strong impression of the limited nature of a woman's life in Jane Austen's era, early-nineteenth-century rural England.
It is difficult to draw conclusions in a general sense for the ways different genres organise their stories but with respect to these two specific texts and writers it is possible to observe a style.
With the novel, the events slowly but continuously are described throughout the text and the story is gradually fed to the reader.
There is not one standout section but an accumulation of ideas, themes and circumstances to lead to the conclusion of the novel.
The recurrent motif of the social events provides a meaningful shape to the text as a whole to help express theme.
The difference with the play is there is a highly explosive beginning, The rest of the play unfolds from that.
This is true for several of Shakespeare's other work such as 'The Tempest' and 'Othello'.
Dialogue is the only means by which the audience can learn and the lack of narrator allows the reader to have an open unbiased judgement on events.
Actions and words are the only source to the thoughts and feelings of the characters.
Whereas with the novel, the author has more control by using a narrator and the reader can directly get inside the character's minds.
Both genres are extremely effective at telling their story and their own use of different techniques and style add to the success of the narrative as a whole.
Both The Waste Land and Movern Callar succeed in representing a contemporary moment; each efficaciously captures the zeitgeist of their age but in highly divergent ways.
Ostensibly worlds apart, many thematic similarities emerge between the texts, leading us to question how and what we define contemporary.
Religion, gender and identity have remained prominent concerns across the ages and each author is unique in their depiction of how these issues impact on their contemporary society.
But, the limitations of language often force the writers to resort to increasingly innovative strategies of rendering these concerns.
Religious ambivalence permeates both texts.
In Movern Callar, capitalizing 'He' has religious associations if 'He' is seen to represent God.
Stealing 'His' identity allows Movern to become her own God; free to lead an existential life as one self-governed and judged by herself alone.
McEwan supports this believing; 'The modern novelist sees man making his own world."
Existentialism seems to engender spiritual and physical liberty; 'Salif Keita sounded so good in the sunshine I stuck out my arms and started spinning round slowly."
Movern appears most positive when communally external and submerged in nature, angered and distressed only when others impose on her world.
Nature imparts the freedom and exhilaration she seeks, literarily making her feel high; 'The land was flattening out I was getting so high up and a hot haze had appeared in the clear bright light,' where as alcohol and substance abuse often leaves her feeling; 'queerish."
March's belief that Warner's; '..youth culture is not the downtrodden city youth..but the ebullient resistance to such as a position,' can supported by Movern's almost Romantic return to childhood happiness and innocence through nature.
Incongruously, Movern is drawn toward religion when in the midst of uncertainty and disappointment as in London she; 'screwed my eyes shut tight and had a little prayer.
Outside it was daylightish.'
Movern's explicit dependence on routine and fascination with the Spanish religious precession suggests she craves the security and structure offered by faith, but by walking; 'towards strobe of the nightclub,' she unequivocally turns toward a different leading light for direction.
Like language in the contemporary world, nothing in the novel has one stable meaning, a principal faucet of much post-structuralist and post-modern thought.
One strategy used by Warner to reflect this is making all images and acts explicitly subject to manifold interpretation, a motif encapsulated by the dismembered corpse.
On one level, 'His' interment implies there is no God, but severing the unified body may also be demonstrative of contemporary religious multiplicity, as many reject the notion of one God and draw spiritual guidance from various religions.
Religion, like the symbolic purpose of the body, is multiple.
Ripping 'Him' apart may also illustrate the destruction of patriarchal dominance.
Repeatedly referring to her dead boyfriend as 'He,' appears to mock the anachronistic insistence on obeying a man like a God.
'He,' is denied an identity and consequently an existence, which suggests that masculine and religious hierarchy have become obsolete in the contemporary world.
If so, society may be in need of establishing new ideological frameworks.
Movern's buoyant optimism when burying 'His' dissected remains, could be read as a celebratory rejection of imposed hierarchical masculine inflexibility and as an indication to embrace multiplicity, a quality often connoted to the female.
Warner may be implying that future frameworks should be based on more feminine characteristics such as being open and adaptable, values necessary for social advancement.
If so, libratory free-choice in both life and religion seems to be the key to freedom and contentment.
It could be argued that Warner utilizes the variability of ecriture feminine as a method of reflecting the volatile, insecure nature of language and life in the modern world.
Ecriture feminine is often deemed unpredictable and flexible, which is essentially what contemporary language has become if fixed meaning is redundant.
The fluidity of an ecriture feminine may therefore offer a more realistic way for Warner to reflect his contemporary world.
Mengham's description of the novel as a; 'stylistically delirious and telepathic account of contemporary social derangements,' supports this suggestion, as emblematic divisions and boundaries often overlap, generating the impression of a more female writing style.
Repeated images, places and phrases create a cyclic structure that opposes stereotypical male linearity, while the surreal compendium of hallucinogenic images produces an anarchic teleology that makes the text unstable and erratic, prominent characteristics of the ecriture feminine.
Movern's inconsistent femininity leads me to agree with Anderson that; 'writing about women does not necessarily make a writer 'feminist.''
Warner's feminine style is used to reflect the nature of language as opposed to make a statement about the position of women, something seemingly resistant to definition in contemporary society.
Although the novel is laced with anti-patriarchal nuances, Movern remains reliant on a man, as it is her boyfriend's money that liberates her.
Repeated descriptions of Movern's underwear sexualise and somewhat reduce her to the position of a fetishized object; 'I licked my fingers to roll the stockings up.'
Kirk supports this interpretation; This last point is contestable as Movern is seldom a passive female; she elects her sexual partners and controls the action; 'I reached down between my legs to move his fingers correctly.'
Contradiction pervades each act of gender significance.
Returning home pregnant with the; 'child of the raves,' fortifies the novel's cyclic structure, suggesting Movern will be trapped in a domestic maternal role.
But, as the father's identity remains undisclosed the male again appears insignificant, thus reinforcing the permeable implication that men may be unimportant in the future.
Gender in contemporary society is hugely nebulous; how it is represented often proves as problematic as how it is defined.
Butler argues that now; 'There is no proper gender,' believing all gender to be performance.
Discourse is a highly formative part of this performance; while Movern's routines are explicitly those of a female, the extent to which a man can genuinely appropriate a woman's voice is questionable.
Accepting Humm's belief that; 'gender is constructed through language and is visible in writing style;'  using direct, pithy end-stopped sentences rarely coloured by emotion make Movern appear more masculine, as conventional male language is seen as ordered and rational.
If male and female speech are at opposite ends of a gendered linguistic divide, their voices cannot be unified without antithetical fracture; the credibility of Movern's female voice is therefore always contestable, as its core is essentially male.
A similar conflict emerges in the Scarlet Letter.
As men, Hawthorne and Warner are socially and linguistically dominant; if Warner has never been externalised by his gender, he cannot empathise with Movern's peripheral position, therefore cannot authentically render her voice.
If language is an essentially masculine medium from which woman is excluded, the female remains outside of language and is therefore silent, as was Coris Jean; 'I never spoke for four year."
Such comments confirm Mills' belief that; 'We are still trapped within the notion of woman's language being deviant, powerless and submissive."
If so, women must find and create their own language.
Interpreting stealing 'His' voice as an empowering reversion of female subordination challenges Mills, yet, it conversely supports hegemonic notions of language as masculine, as only through a male voice, that of Warner and her boyfriend, is Movern ever heard; 'His name on the first page of that novel: By Movern Callar."
Without graphological speech marks to accompany her words Movern is essentially silent, admitting herself; 'I'm a right queer-case for not talking.
I'm taciturn."
But, this is complicated by also expressing male speech without quotation marks.
The reader is therefore led to question whether an author can or should appropriate the voice of another person.
If a male writer can employ aspects of the ecriture feminine and the female has access to 'masculine' dominant discourse, then the notion of gendered language seems defunct and outdated, as in the contemporary world gender boundaries, like gendered language, overlap.
Supposed 'male' and 'female' language are no longer straightforward binaries, as both Warner and Movern are published in spite of 'stealing' the voice of another sex.
The relevance of authorship therefore becomes debatable, as ownership over discourse seems impossible.
The literal death of the author prefigures symbolic death of authorial control; the originating conscience of the creator no longer exists making Movern's plagiarism questionable, as technically no one owns the text.
Movern concurrently rejects both moral and linguistic codes.
Ignoring established grammatical rules allows her to narrate in her own sociolect, one comprised of compound neologisms, syntactic inversion and unique phonetic spellings that foreground the thematic centrality of manifesting one's identity, see; 'her mouth seeming right deep and darkish cause of the whiteishness of faces.'
The Guyanese poet Agard also manipulates language but in making it his own, is seen to violate English; 'mugging de Queen's English/ is the story of my life."
Dismantling and restructuring language enables those like Movern who are outside of the dominant discourse, to articulate their 'story' with realism and authenticity.
Substituting 'No' with 'Nut,' and Scottish colloquialisms such as; 'wee', autographically inscribe Movern's accent and culture in the novel.
This demonstrates both the mutability of language and importance of marking Scotland out as devolved from England, a prominent concern for contemporary Scots.
Warner unsettles notions of Scotland as substandard by revealing what is often considered the contrastive, inferior other to be disturbingly similar to the dominant.
Exposing the supposed cosmopolitan antithetical Londoners as inarticulate and inept, demonstrates the equal value of Scottish discourse as they; 'talked so constant you found their blethers made less sense than locals back in the resort.'
Eliot's contemporary moment was also dominated by conflict.
Lanbaum asserts; 'No poem seemed to express more of its time than The Waste Land."
Adopting a cultural materialist reading of the poem seems unavoidable as much of its structure and imagery is utilised specifically to capture social disjunction.
Amalgamating assorted metrical and rhythmical patterns generates an intentional chaos that reflects the uncertainty and insecurity following the First World War.
Abrupt syntactic shifts convey the turbulence of an era characterized by sudden change and decaying social constancy.
Fusing varied poetic forms may be representative of the difficulty inherent in establishing the desired European unity craved by many.
Modernist writers began to pioneer new strategies that enabled them to express the unique concerns of the post war world, a new era unlike any other where previous literary forms began to seem inadequate.
The poem's ostensibly random assimilation of images rejects order and boundaries, reflecting the zeitgeist of writers and painters engaged in a similar process.
Eliot's radical deployment of literary and mythical allusions, severs the once coherent and admired words of others in order to demonstrate the destruction of stability and tradition engendered by war.
A; 'heap of broken images,' without obvious connective associations dislocate history and geography, leaving the reader like those in the wasteland, disorientated and bewildered.
The difficulty of deciphering complex allusive networks enables the reader to undergo a crisis of understanding that engenders a sense of humiliation.
The overwhelming impossibility of understanding the allusive context of each image allows the reader to share the futility and failure plaguing the characters and age; 'We who were living are now dying/ with a little patience.'
Cyclic images convey the repetitive ennui plaguing; 'crowds of people, walking round in a ring."
The poem's lack of structural progression suggests there is no escape from this perpetual psychological wasteland.
Entrapped in the eternal present, past and future become indecipherable.
April is the; 'cruelest month,' as the confusion between; 'memory and desire,' leaves the inhabitants of post-war Europe wishing for the merciful oblivion of a; 'forgetful snow'.
Man seems incapable of progression; superficially successful city workers are imprisoned by their pursuit of monetary gain, as capitalist advancement leads to reversion and decay in the; Pathetic fallacy animates the murky gloom shrouding a capital dominated by pessimism.
Mass urbanization appears to have deprived workers of their identity and humanity, leaving them apathetic and isolated; 'Sighs, short and infrequent, were exhaled,/ And each man fixed his eyes before his feet.'
Man's emotional paralysis is exposed through Eliot's perturbing portrayal of relationships.
Even when seemingly united, characters remain alienated.
Alternate rhyming couplets provide a surface impression of harmony between the typist and clerk, but as the rhyme's mechanical predictability becomes apparent, an impression of monotonous indifference is created.
'Hardly aware of her departed lover', reinforces the distance between them; they are physically one but emotionally disconnected.
Characters often appear imprisoned in their minds, doomed to continual misunderstanding in being unable to use language effectively.
Ornate, decorative language in the 'Game of Chess,' generates an artificiality that exposes the essential emptiness of modern life.
The woman is; 'troubled, confused and drowned the sense in orders,'  as too is the reader, lost in the convoluted syntax, enjambment and sparse punctuation used to illustrate her claustrophobic hysteria.
The omission of inverted commas in the man's responses and absent question mark in; 'Speak to me.
Why do you never speak,' suggests that we overhear only his thoughts.
The position of women here lacks the ambivalence of Movern Callar, as they are explicitly passive.
Disturbing allusions to Philomel imply male dominance, as refusing to speak gives the man power to prolong the woman's anxiety.
Women also remain controlled sexually by men.
Philomel is; 'so rudely forced,' as too is the typist describing the clerk's caresses as; 'assaults,' that are 'unreproved, if undesired."
Movern can be deemed as equally subservient if her voice and actions are seen to be subject to masculine regulation.
To an extent, like Lil she is trapped by pregnancy, although Movern's life is not devoted to fulfilling the sexual needs of a husband who; 'wants a good time."
Ascertaining how much the position of women has changed is highly problematic; although they appear stronger in Movern Callar, women remain far from free, condemned to remain governed by their biological function to a degree.
Nameless and faceless characters pervade The Waste Land, as unsure of themselves as we are of them.
No central voice dominates narration; continual changes in pronoun and tense leave the reader doubting each character's gender, nationality and perspective.
Warner also depicts fragmentary characters whose personalities are often encapsulated by their nicknames.
Differing concepts of identity were emerging during the Modernist period, forcing writers to resort to new modes of characterization.
Like gender and language, identity has become polymorphous and heterogeneous.
Chameleonic identities and the limitation of subjectivity are often seen as more post-modern concerns.
Bertens claims; 'the..stable subject of modernity has been replaced by a postmodern agent whose identity is largely other-determined and always in process,' but here Eliot demonstrates that attaining a definitive sense of identity was also concern in the Modernist era.
What we define contemporary again becomes contestable, as certain dilemmas are not new or exclusive to one era.
Jain contests this to a degree, interpreting the poem's hetroglossic pollyvocality and dislocated vocalization as demonstrating that; The infiltration of foreign languages supports this by creating a sense of displacement that reflects the absence of European geographical stability.
Ironically, the more languages and voices used in the poem, the less understanding seems to exist.
Discontinuous, depersonalised voices often merge, as dialogue, monologue and fragmented streams of consciousness coexist confusingly.
Language almost becomes a barrier that prevents communication; Structuralist theory supports the notion that language cannot convey meaning; if the perceptual image engendered by each signifier is different to each individual reader, then we can never truly communicate with accuracy.
As in many of the relationships depicted, verbal interaction appears pointless, as ascertaining a definitive sense of what someone else means through their language alone seems impossible.
Experimental strategies such as objective correlative and sensory manipulation therefore become paramount in evoking elusive states of mind that language alone cannot convey.
Auditory descriptions such as; 'drip drop drop drop drop,' employ repeated harsh plosive phonemes in order to emulate the abrasive and hostile nature of the dystopian future presented.
Drawing our focus to only the aural properties of water make it a physical sound alone, like the deluded traveler we can only hear it as; 'there is no water."
Certain inexpressible emotions are fundamentally vague and can only be realistically depicted through obscure methods such as imagery.
Nature becomes a metaphor for contemporary humanity, 'sunken' and 'limp,' desperate for both literal and spiritual regeneration.
Scientific progression and industrial growth led to an increased focus on the material which disturbed established notions of morality and engendered religious doubt.
Infinite death appears to replace the promise of eternal life.
The response to the unanswerable question; 'Who is the third who walks always beside you?"
is formed by a figurative image of the grim reaper; 'There is always another one walking beside you/ Gliding wrapt in a brown mantle, hooded."
Powerful visual images become a substitute for a language that is unable to articulate the horror of a modern world where hope is nonexistent.
Tobain supports this argument; 'For Eliot, these visions of contemporary society are inseparable from the loss of faith.
Man no longer believes."
But this is contestable if we believe the thunder offers a way forward, as the poem's focus on religious futility may be an attempt to capture a moment of extreme potential.
Change is desperately needed; in unifying Buda and St Augustine, Eliot may suggest an amalgamation of Western and Eastern wisdom is the answer.
As is possibly implied in the novel, nature may hold 'the key' to spiritual advancement as the elements replace God, as in the; 'empty chapel, only the wind's home."
By leaving the decision to follow or reject the thunder's advice in the reader's hands, Eliot refuses to provide a conclusive resolution, a common feature of Modernist writing.
The sinister repetition of; 'London Bridge is falling down falling down,' infers that man is destined to deteriorate further if he ignores this advice.
The poem purposefully lacks closure; ending without a full stop implies that there is no one solution to the problems presented.
I believe Murphy encapsulates Eliot's intention effectively; As in Movern Callar, people are constantly seeking new ways of understanding the self; dissociation from others is central in both texts, but how or whether we can reconcile this remains open to contention.
Particular dilemmas continually affect humanity making it appear as though nothing is new, a key component of post-modernist thought.
Both texts to an extent support Monteith's belief that; 'contemporary fiction is a barometer of the nation's intellectual health,' but what is unique to our era is made complex by the impression that similar preoccupations will always dominate the contemporary moment.
Certain questions remain irresolvable as no author or age appears to have the solution, an unsettling implication that forces the reader to address the inadequacies of both man and language.
The one thing seemingly set to change are the strategies used to manifest these concerns, as both Warner and Eliot show language to be as unstable and mutable as our concepts of identity, gender and religion.
The vagueness of the words "some of us" not only demands enquiry into who, specifically, is/are "trying to find identities besides the centralised "I"", but is a key indicator of the nature of postmodern texts.
To expand, postmodernism usually features ambiguity of the meaning, and indeed credibility of the "I" in a text.
The "I" can be the author of, characters in, or even the audience of the text, because, like with all other facets of postmodern literature, the boundaries of "I" no longer exist.
The loss of traditional notions of "I", or of the subject, is one symptom of the postmodern condition.
Others include the rejection of the possibility of any absolute truth, because everything is relative to time, place, and the individual.
This entails the rejection of all meta-narratives - because it renders the meta-, or 'outside, absolute' position impossible.
One aspect of postmodernism is the erosion of the distinction between high and low art, or culture.
The above technological advances and mass consumerism have eradicated the elitism of modernist high art, making it availible to the masses.
Although this seems liberatory and positive, to the critic Frederic Jameson, , it "is perhaps the most distressing development of all from an academic standpoint, which has traditionally had a vested interest in preserving a realm of high or elite culture against the surrounding environment of philistinism, of schlock and kitsch, of TV series and Reader's Digest culture".
Another important aspect of postmodernism, which is central to idea of the self , is the 'Shrinking World Syndrome'.
The internet , interactive television, mobile phones, world-wide companies like Ikea and MacDonalds make the world feel like a 'Global Village' - easily accessible and uniform.
This mass consumerism and globalisation has a homogenising effect on the individual 'self' as everybody, from all classes, age, nationality etc., has access to every type of product.
The self is lost as it plugs itself into a cyberspace node and becomes part of a hyper-reality, fantasy world where anything is possible.
As Peter Brooker says on page 21/22 of his introduction to Modernism/Postmodernism, "This faceless expansion of the global market and the accompanying development of electronic media has penetrated all levels of existence, says Jameson, producing a massively coded world of relentless commodification and dramatically altered social and psychic conditions."
An aspect of postmodern which really shapes the way writers create characters in their texts is "what is generally called the 'death of the subject' or, to say it in more conventional language, the end of individualism as such" .
Jameson offers two standpoints on the death of the individual - the first, that in the old, "classic age of competitive capitalism" the subject existed, but is now extinct.
The second is that the subject never actually existed, that it was yet another meta-narrative, constructed to comfort people with the idea that they "possessed this unique personal identity."
Hence, postmodern writers strive to replicate the post-modern mind in their characters; a real, human mind which must be baffled by the complexity of this postmodern age but, according to theorists, has no individuality.
In The Wasp Factory, Iain Banks presents us with the unlikely, but perfect victim of postmodern media - the main channel of influence on the nation.
Frank is unlikely, because, located on a remote peninsula in the North of Scotland, one assumes he escapes most contact with the  modern world.
However, this only reinforces the idea of the all-pervasive, unavoidable nature of postmodernism.
He is the perfect victim because he lacks virtually all touchstones of real-life and 'normality', and is like an empty vessel for media influence.
In Wise Children, Angela Carter presents us with character identities which avoid the "centralised "I"" in many ways, but mainly by mixing-up and therefore transcending high and low art boundaries.
Shakespeare plays such a central role - he inspires and governs the Hazard 'dynasty', but is woven into the text so deeply - their address, 49 Bard rd; their shared birthday , King Lear's/Melchior's crown, the 'What!
You Will?'
play, to mention but a few examples, that he becomes comic and equal to the supposed low culture of the Chances song-and-dance acts.
Shakespeare is just one example of the text's rich intertextuality: on page 295 of Flesh and the Mirror, Kate Webb lists more canonical names - "Milton, Sterne, Wordsworth... Dickens, Lewis Carroll making an appearance as a purveyor of 'kiddiporn' [another postmodern reduction of the sublime to the ridiculous], Samuel Butler, Shaw, Dostoevsky... Henry James and Tennessee Williams...are just a random selection."
In Ondaatje's The Collected Works of Billy the Kid, the reader is offered no kind of "centralised "I".
The text's eclectic style, range of narrative voices and point-blank refusal to give any absolute 'truths' makes it impossible to discern any "centralised "I" at all.
The range of voices and absence of any guiding, omniscient narrator accords with Roland Barthes' theory of 'The Death of the Author'.
In his essay 'The Death of the Author', Barthes criticises the way that "The explanation of a work is always sought in the man or woman who produced it, as if it were always in the end, through the more or less transparent allegory of the fiction, the voice of a single person, the author 'confiding' in us."
As his text's title suggests, Ondaatje renounced his role as what Barthes called "Author-God", opening it up to a collection of voices , as a more adequate way of painting Billy's picture.
This technique drastically increases the role of the reader - when the text isn't "centred on the author, his person, his life, his tastes, his passions" ), the reader has a chance to project his or her own meaning onto the text.
In Pat Garrett, we find an absorbing counter-part and opponent to Billy the Kid; a character who actually destroyed his own "centralised "I"" and remoulded it himself.
Garrett and Billy, originally partners in crime, split and followed two completely contrasting paths, which are fascinating to examine as two different ways of finding "identities besides the centralised "I"".
Billy remained wild, lost, an outlaw who roamed the country: Although just criss-crossing the one border, this passage could symbolise all of Billy's journeys "from country to country" and from a psychoanalytical viewpoint, crossing borders could symbolise the boundaries Billy breaks in order to lose, or find himself.
Observing the "different colours of tree green", almost sounds like a navigational device and suggests at the natural, wild life Billy has chosen.
Pat Garrett, on the other hand, rejecting the outlawed life, forced himself into alcoholism.
Upon reaching complete oblivion; the point where anyone else would breakdown, Garrett stayed in control: After complete self-destruction, we witness the descent into madness and loathing of nature - Hence begins obssessive controlling of all things natural.
Garrett's self de- and reconstruction is symbolised perfectly by his hobby of collecting stuffed birds.
The killing, and removal of the insides of the bird, and then artificial stuffing, reflects what he did to himself, and what allows him to be cold-blooded killer, or as Ondaatje puts it, a "sane assass in sane assass in sane..." .
Therefore, Ondaatje has shown us Billy's external, and Garrett's internal, introverted quest "to find identities besides the centralised "I"".
Garrett's fragmented, de- "centralised" identity links to that of Frank in The Wasp Factory.
The difference is that Frank constructed his own, fundamentally flawed identity  from what he has learnt from television.
Thus as Thom Nairn puts it on page 128 of The Scottish Novel Since the Seventies, Frank grows up "in a society where machismo is paramount... As a result, he is the meanest of the mean, typifying Bank's pervasive interest in quasi-feral anti-heroes."
Frank, like Garrett hates women and all things 'natural', particularly the sea: Frank's obvious reasons for hatred of women aside for a moment, we can gather from Garrett and Frank's characters that the unpredictability and inevitability of nature is the biggest threat to their artificially created personalities because it is everything they are not: natural.
However, to go back to Frank's early development, according to the theory of Jacque Lacan's 'Mirror Phase' and the 'Symbolic Order', it is evident that the isolation of the island, with nearly no contact with other children, severely affected Frank's sense of self.
In Lacan, Malcolm Bowie explains Lacan's theories: "The imaginary is the order of mirror-images, identifications and reciprocities.
It is the dimension of experience in which the individual seeks not only to placate the Other but to dissolve his otherness by becoming his counterpart... Lacan's 'Imaginary' thus creates a bridge between inner-directed and outer-directed mental acts" .
Having nothing else to identify with, Frank could not "dissolve his otherness" or establish that crucial bridge "between inner-directed and outer-directed acts": thus couldn't connect his inner, fragmented "I" with his mirror-image, ideal "I".
Furthermore, this means Frank cannot place himself in Lacan's 'Symbolic Order'.
Hence, he has only himself, and his lack of the ultimate symbol of masculinity, to focus on.
Therefore he surrounds himself with a mass of compensatory phallic symbols - the island in itself is one, so are "the Sacrifice Poles", and he also enacts male domination - "disrupted watercourses, ruptured dams" .
Contrary to this essay's title quotation, in Wise Children, Dora and Nora Chance desperately seek their father's love in a quest to find their "centralised "I"s".
Indeed, most of the action of the book is motivated by their attempts to claim a place in their father's heart: This desperate neediness and adoration of a man who has neglected them so much, appears to undermine the fact that Carter "recognised herself as a feminist" .
However, because Dora and Nora, have taken in "the old, the orphaned, the abandoned and the handicapped, be they stepmums or cats", they are, in reality much better off, and have formed much more of a 'family' without their run-away fathers North of the river.
Indeed, Dora's narrative "is not one of victimhood or martyrdom" at all because she and Nora enjoy great "freedoms for which their legitimate twin sisters, Imogen and Saskia could never hope" .
She tells the audience not to Hence, as Webb continues on page 282, "Wise Children, then, not only challenges legitimacy, it is also a celebration of the vitality of otherness."
Hence the absence of a father provides the twins with the perfect opportunity "to find identities besides the centralised "I"" by allowing them to develop and explore themselves fully, and, in effect, to have their own sexual revolution!
In relation to Lacan's 'Mirror Phase', and "the moment at which the child seems suddenly to have a discovery to celebrate, and to be able to formulate, however roughly, the propositions 'I am that' and 'That is me'", Dora and Nora's relationship as twins becomes very important.
Growing up so close, and being part of a life-long double act; made them entirely dependent on each other - for one was literally the 'Mirror Image' of the other: they are like two halves of "the centralised "I"".
They draw strength from one another, even share the same man , and Nora explains how it feels when they're separated: Thus, however much Dora and Nora think they need Melchior, Carter shows us that it is the women who are with you throughout your so-called deserted, illegitimate life, who really make you who you are, your "centralised "I"".
This essay has focused on the different ways The Collected Works of Billy the Kid, Wise Children and The Wasp Factory show how "some of us" either are, or aren't "trying to find identities besides the centralised "I"".
Ondaatje's work is the most direct example of an "I" that is strongly decentralised, and unfixed; leaving the meaning open to be interpreted by the individual reader.
Page 19 gives us a real clue as to the impossibility of forming a "centralised "I"", when Paulita Maxwell denounces a photograph of Billy: The message is the photograph, like writing, is unreliable and unrepresentative, and to try and decipher someone's personality by looking at a single snapshot of one second in somebody's life, or just listening to one person's account, can be entirely misleading.
Hence Ondaatje's choice to blend different voices, literary styles, and to mix visuals with writing; which is a very postmodern style.
Banks' complicated protagonist Frank comes from a very different angle: in desperately seeking his "centralised "I", he creates a mish-mash of a personality from what he has seen on television, which is yet another postmodern phenomenon.
Finally, Carter challenges the idea of a "centralised "I"" in a much subtler way - by presenting women and children seeking men and fathers, but showing their lives to be more complete and happy without them, an ultimately feminist position.
'Upon his Leaving his Mistress' and '[I am bothered when I think]' are two poems very diverse in style and structure but seem to share a major common theme of love and marriage.
Each poetic text deals with the idea in a contrasting but uniquely effective fashion.
Simon Armitage's '[I am bothered when I think]' is unusually presented in an irregular sonnet form consisting of seven, four and three lined stanzas contrasting with the traditional Shakespearean sonnet of regular metre and rhythm, ending in an effective rhyming couplet.
This subversion of the sonnet form perhaps signifies the unconventional way love is dealt with in the poem, as can be seen with the speaker's clumsy confession of love: However, though the poem is set out in sonnet form, the structure is loose and seemingly free verse as there is no fixed underlying metre and the lines are only broken up by the space on the page.
Enjambment makes the poem almost prose-like creating the effect of on running thoughts.
It also has the effect of revealing the natural sequence of the story he is telling.
The breaks in the line create intrigue and persuade the reader to continue on.
In contrast, John Wilmot's 'Upon his Leaving his Mistress' consists of three stanzas of seven lines.
It mainly contains iambic tetrameter but occasional lines add an extra syllable, in these cases ending on a trochee rather than the usual iamb.
The effect of this added syllable is to break up the rhythm of the poem and slow the reader down compelling them to think more carefully about the literature, for example in the first stanza: The use of punctuation so suddenly after the sentence has just begun, forces the reader to pause, slowing down their reading and provoking them to be more aware of the metre and rhythm of the text.
Perhaps the pace of the poem reflects the rate at which the speaker's talk is progressing.
There is a regular rhyme scheme of aabbccc in each stanza, which makes the change in metre more outstanding and effective.
There is no set rhyme scheme in the poem by Armitage.
The only rhyme seen is internal and half rhyme; 'flame/name' and end rhyme seen in only two occasions; 'skin/in' and 'burner/over'.
Alliteration and assonance are also used to create a more unified effect, placing a sense of order on the deep emotions conveyed in the poem: 'Bunsen burner', 'blades/played/naked/flame/name'.
'[I am bothered when I think]' almost seems to parody the conventional love sonnets with the melodramatic exclamation 'O the unrivalled stench of branded skin'.
The humorous, childish and mischievous story told, diminishes the epic quality conventional sonnets encompass.
Armitage's work does not convey the majestic romantic images of a traditional love sonnet.
This idea is emphasised by the use of common everyday language; 'bothered', 'bad things', unlike the established archaic, romantic language of the contrasting love poem 'Upon his Leaving his Mistress'; 'Universal influence', 'some kinder Pow'r did fashion'.
The elaborate language used and periphrasis in Wilmot's piece causes the speaker to exude charm as he uses tremendous flattery to hide any darker truths.
Instead of telling his 'mistress' he is leaving her, he uses such flowery language and phrases as: and This flattery hides him from his responsibility to her.
The speaker uses contrasting images to effectively persuade the girl to not be with him.
In the first stanza he uses hellish imagery: 'to damn you to be only mine?'
and the idea of him having many faces.
The capital letter here creates an identity for the 'Face' as if it is its own separate person, enhancing the speaker's deceitful nature.
However, in the last stanza, he uses such extravagant imagery as 'live up to thy mighty Mind; And be the Mistress of Mankind'.
The alliteration here stresses the emphasis the speaker wants to make on creating a great impression on the listener and it furthermore enhances the grand quality of the idea, leaving a resounding effect for the final line.
Throughout '[I am bothered when I think]' can be seen a specific lexical cluster containing such words as 'flame', 'burn', 'branded' and 'marked' working to conjure up a strong image in the reader's mind.
The sensual imagery creates a vivid and painful reflection of events appealing to the reader's own senses.
Armitage's use of words such as 'stench' directly add to the physical reading of the poem.
Figurative language is a common and effective feature in both poems.
In the piece by Armitage, the 'flame' of the 'Bunsen burner' is personified: This creates sexual connotations of heat and passion emphasising the feelings the speaker has, revealing a deeper, more sexual interpretation of the poem.
The word 'played' enhances the idea of youth and the childish nature of the boy and the foolishness of the situation, contrasting sharply with the serious, adult-like idea of marriage conveyed later on in the final stanza of the poem; 'asking if you would marry me'.
Similarly, Wilmot uses the same form of figurative language as he personifies the 'Earth' in the final stanza creating a maternal image of 'her' with her 'willing Womb'.
The 'Mistress' is ultimately being compared to mother 'Earth', which metaphorically reveals the girl's own physical state of being whilst simultaneously creating a powerful comparison.
The metaphorical line; 'when I held a pair of scissors by the blades' in Armitage's poem, perhaps reveals to the reader the idea that love is dangerous and the boy is holding danger in his hands.
This agrees with the images of fire and burning seen throughout the piece.
Marriage is symbolised metaphorically by the 'two burning rings' connecting strongly with the obvious idea of the wedding ceremony and exchanging rings at marriage.
The word 'Marked' stands solitary amongst the loose enjambment of the surrounding text, as it stands at the end of a line after a full stop creating a stronger image and greater impact on the reader.
The word seems to suggest an eternal agreement to be together and the concept that this girl is his chosen one.
In the final stanza of 'Upon his Leaving his Mistress', Wilmot uses images of birth and pregnancy.
The sibilance of the first line 'See the kind See- receiving Earth' seems to represent the sound of flowing water linking to the following lines of the stanza: 'Show'rs' and 'fall'.
This may have sexual or maternal connotations of flowing liquids and the breaking of waters immediately prior to the baby's birth.
Rhetorical questions are another device Wilmot uses to convey how skilled and apt the speaker is at charming and persuading.
The rhetorical device forces the attention onto the listener who is inclined to think a certain way: 'And shall my Celia be confin'd?'
It is a clever technique as it enables the speaker to answer his own question in any way he pleases.
As can be seen, both poems concerning a similar theme use many different devices such as figurative language, imagery, rhythm, metre, and rhyme and language techniques in different ways to create equally effective poems but with dramatically contrasting styles and structures.
Murphy describes The Waste Land as a; 'masterful stroke, the deconstruction of literature for the sake of reconstructing it in the image of the Modern Age."
Although radical and experimental in his approach to narration, the degree to which Eliot has lost faith in its necessity is debatable.
Character and mood are central in the poem as are they in Conrad's Heart of Darkness, but the extent to which they replace narrative is contestable, as both Eliot and Conrad often rely on structure to create mood and character.
Establishing a definitive notion of what constitutes narrative is also problematic, as it can often be seen as a component of form, which makes it imperative to examine the structure employed in each work.
The construction and definition of narrative differed in each writer's period, making it like mood and character, a concept that is characterised by indeterminacy.
Ostensibly, repeated metaphoric and literal emphasis on journeying suggests the Heart of Darkness will employ a traditionally sequential narrative; 'Watching the coast as it slips by the ship is like thinking about an enigma.
There it is before you-smiling, frowning, inviting."
Progressive, present tense dynamic verbs create an immediacy and insistence that move both the reader and boat forward, providing a superficial impression of linearity.
Temporal elasticity complicates this as Marlow continually moves between the past and present tense.
By superimposing present day awareness on reminiscence, the narrative is able to realistically mirror the flow of cerebral consciousness, as it too is subject to disruption and works by associative rather than linear logic.
Recurrent digressions, pauses and reflections punctuate Marlow's meditative introspection, creating both vocal credibility and a discontinuous narrative.
Preventing the interior monologue from advancing in a strictly chronological manner raises questions about the nature of progression; one of the novel's key tropes.
Narrative is far from defunct in the novel as it often used to fortify thematic preoccupations, leading me to agree with Brooks that Conrad; Conrad's innovative use of narrative is far from traditional as the novel is comprised of a series of framed narratives that lack exclusive confines.
Juxtaposing multiple vantage points engenders an aura of confusion.
The river image, like the narrative, parallels motifs such as disorientation; 'you lose your way on that river as you would in a desert, and butted all day long against shoals, trying to find the channel."
Narrative therefore operates on both a symbolic and structural level, as the emblematic layers generated by using structure to mirror content, enriches certain moods.
Lothe's belief that there is a; 'remarkably productive interplay of narrative method and thematics,' can be supported by Conrad's confusion of time and tense, as it creates the impression of a cyclic narrative.
Culminating where it originates in both location and speaker makes the reader question how far the narrative actually progresses, thus highlighting the illusory nature of what Conrad's society deemed progression.
Resisting linearity utilizes structure to depict the intrinsic paralysis and stagnation inherent in an interminable journey, whilst demonstrating the interdependence of form and content.
Recurrent fog imagery employs pathetic fallacy to fortify this impression of impenetrability and immobilization, as it makes the crew feel as; 'if we had been buried miles deep in a heap of cotton-wool.
It felt like it too-choking, warm, stifling.'
By refusing to deploy a conclusive culmination, Conrad, like Eliot to an extent, uses structural unpredictability to capture the unrest of an age suffused by uncertainty.
Scientific progression and the growth of industry led to an increased focus on the material, disturbing established notions of morality while engendering religious doubt.
Omitting a categorical ending could be seen as a rejection of the traditional story form.
Although structural experimentation allows Conrad to create a new type of narrative, it does not dismantle its importance and purpose; conversely it seems to foreground the necessity of narrative, almost restoring our faith in the need for form.
The light we expect brought to darkness is denied and contradictions remain unresolved in order to focus our attention on what is absent; 'The inner truth is hidden-luckily, luckily.
',  Like Marlow we yearn to hear Kurtz speak but he never assumes the position of narrator.
His voice is relayed through disjointed and vague fragments of reported speech that offer none of the explanations we desire; 'Live rightly, die, die...." Exposing one considered a; 'prodigy..an emissary of pity, and science, and progress,' as a; 'pitiful dupiter,' enables the reader to truly share Marlow's frustration thus making dissatisfaction a palpable force; Marlow's tangible disillusionment is that of the age.
Mood, narrative structure and character can therefore be seen as interdependent and interweaving, as they are often made more efficacious by intersecting.
Kurtz is a highly complex character who simultaneously functions as an intriguing example of humanity and structural core.
Like his legend, Kurtz is an empty façade, the epitomic hollow that is the missing formal closure craved by the reader and Marlow.
Both are enigmatic, elusive and magnetic; they draw us forward but do not exist; 'He was just a word to me.. Do you see him?
Do you see the story?
Do you see anything?"
Narrative and structure therefore remain key components of the novel.
Modernist texts provide intellectual engagement by resisting passive reading; challenging the reader to decipher abstruse imagery and concealed inferences allows them to become a co-creator of meaning.
The narrative continually forces the reader to re-asses their opinions, allowing them to undergo a journey into the self.
Conrad's preoccupation with penetrating the psyche is revealed through repeated allusions to densely layered vegetation; 'The river side bushes were certainly very thick; but the undergrowth was evidently penetrable."
Whether we should enter the metonymic 'undergrowth' that is the mind, is made questionable by a narrative structure that purposefully penetrates then withdraws.
Marlow symbolically penetrates the self by literally infiltrating the jungle, but providentially retreats; Having been; 'permitted to draw back my hesitating foot,'  Marlow is salvaged from a similar fate to Kurtz by his augmented knowledge of humanity.
Najder's opinion jars with the suggestion that Conrad focuses on exploring mind and character, as he believes; Reading Kurtz as a Faustian warning regarding the corruptive power of ambition supports this evaluation as he is both literally and figuratively consumed by hubris, reduced to a; 'cage of ribs all astir."
Kurtz's physical starvation emulates that of his soul, as his fanatical materialism has eroded his sense of humanity and morality leaving him; 'like a vapour exhaled by the earth.'
Conversely, Curle believes Conrad's figures are; 'rounded out with extraordinary fullness,' but much evidence contradicts this; they are often purposefully ambiguous and incomplete, emblematic of moods and ideas.
I am therefore increasingly inclined to support Najder's argument that Conrad uses characters to; 'focus our attention on problems rather than personalities."
Crawling, bald and enervated, Kurtz becomes pitifully dependant, explicitly infantilised as a demonstration of how capitalist progression can lead to human degeneration.
Conrad complicates the binary between culture and civilization through Kurtz, as his desire for wealth and imperialist advancement results in a return to what is base and savage in man; Kurtz becomes the; 'soul.. of sham distinction, of all the appearances of success and power."
Contrastive opposites create paradoxical images of evolution and success that force the reader to confront the contradictions of imperialism; The cyclic narrative structure and evocations of regression fortify the suggestion that progress actually leads to demise if it incites economical, cultural and geographical violation.
Confusing dichotomies permeate the text.
New and experimental symbolic binaries unsettle the reader's expectations, making them question the degree to which they accept certain hegemonic ideologies.
Black is traditionally connoted to evil, but here explicitly white characters use violent, primitive methods to tame the dark natives and jungle.
The symbolic association of white, like the white people, is corrupted.
The chief accountant is sheathed in white, blinding the vision of those around in order to conceal the metaphoric darkness of his monetary greed.
Conventionally connoted to purity, ivory ironically corrupts men by enticing them to build wealth instead of civilization.
Kurtz, like ivory becomes polluted; ''ivory' rang in the air...you would think they were praying to it.
A taint.. blew through it all, like a whiff from some corpse."
Whiteness is further manipulated by being associated with death, as Kurtz in his skeletal state is an; 'animated image of death carved out of ivory.'
The image of white bones evokes notions of fossils, thus implying that humanity faces moral extinction if ethical frameworks continue to be scarified to avarice.
Conrad again reveals an admirable ability to capture mood and character, yet remains dependent on narrative to do so.
In 'The Game of Chess,' Eliot too successfully demonstrates that the creation of mood and complex character need not be at the expense of telling an interesting story.
The reader becomes drawn into the fascinating world created through the characters presented.
Ornate, decorative language generates an artificiality that exposes the essential emptiness of modern life.
The woman is; 'troubled, confused and drowned the sense in orders,'  as too is the reader, lost in the convoluted syntax, enjambment and sparse punctuation used to illustrate her claustrophobic hysteria.
Characters in the poem often appear imprisoned in their minds, doomed to continual misunderstanding in being unable to use language effectively.
The omission of inverted commas in the assumed man's responses and absent question mark in; 'Speak to me.
Why do you never speak,' suggests that we overhear only his thoughts.
Accustomed to the woman's habitual questioning, he sees no point in replying.
His flippant indifference reveals an unsettling lack of communication between the sexes.
Much is deliberately and literally unsaid, making suggestibility as powerful here as it is in the novel.
Character seems to not only replace the need for narrative but also mood on occasion.
Even when seemingly united, characters remain alienated.
Alternate rhyming couplets provide a surface impression of harmony between the typist and clerk, but as the rhyme's mechanical predictability becomes apparent, an impression of monotonous apathy is created.
'Hardly aware of her departed lover', reinforces the distance between them; they are physically one but emotionally disconnected and isolated.
Unlike Conrad, Eliot severs the conventional unity between plot and character by depicting fragmentary snatches of individuals that demonstrate how narrative is no longer a necessary component of character creation.
Lanbaum views this as a; 'reaction against the Nineteenth century belief in the individual as the one reality you could be sure of,' which may be why no stable identity exists in The Waste Land.
Characters are mainly nameless and faceless, as unsure of themselves as we are of them.
Differing concepts of identity were emerging during the period, which may be why writers resorted to new and innovative modes of characterization.
No central voice dominates narration; continual changes in pronoun and tense leave the reader doubting each character's gender, nationality and perspective.
Hetroglossic pollyvocality and dislocated vocalization ensures that mood, like character is subject to abrupt and instantaneous change.
Jain believes; The infiltration of foreign languages supports this by creating a sense of disorientating displacement that reflects the absence of European geographical stability.
Ironically, the more languages and voices used in the poem, the less understanding seems to exist.
Discontinuous, depersonalised voices often merge, as dialogue, monologue and fragmented streams of consciousness coexist confusingly.
Language appears to have become a barrier that prevents communication; Language, like narrative seems inadequate and defunct, as neither has the power convey the complex workings of the human mind.
The omission of explanatory connections between images may be a method of representing the processes of imagination, making the poem, like the novel, a journey into the self.
It could be argued that because certain inexpressible emotions are fundamentally vague, they can only be realistically depicted through obscure methods such as imagery.
Eliot can therefore be seen as generating a new way to communicate, using mood and image in place of narrative.
Powerful visual images become a substitute for a language that is unable to articulate the horror of a future where hope is nonexistent; 'He wept.
He promised "a new start."'
The response to the unanswerable question; 'Who is the third who walks always beside you?"
is formed by a figurative image of the grim reaper; 'There is always another one walking beside you/ Gliding wrapt in a brown mantle, hooded."
Infinite death appears to replace the promise of eternal life.
The desert therefore becomes a metaphoric representation of a Godless world if we agree with Coote that; 'The landscapes are the landscapes of the mind."
He goes on to argue the poem; 'ends with the narrator sitting amid the wreck of urban culture, threatened by madness and longing for the peace of God,' but this becomes contestable if we believe the thunder offers a way forward.
By leaving the decision to follow or reject its advice in the reader's hands, Eliot like Conrad refuses to provide a conclusive resolution.
The sinister repetition of; 'London Bridge is falling down falling down,' infers that man is destined to sink and fall continuously if he ignores this advice.
Like the novel, the poem lacks closure; ending without a full stop implies that there is no one solution to the problems presented.
Seemingly having lost faith in narrative and language, Eliot is forced to experiment with other methods of creating meaning, hence an increased reliance on divergent literary techniques.
Objective correlative and sensory manipulation become paramount in evoking elusive moods and states of mind.
Auditory descriptions such as; 'drip drop drop drop drop,' employ repeated harsh plosive phonemes in order to emulate the abrasive and hostile nature of the dystopian future presented.
Drawing our focus to only the aural properties of water make it a physical sound alone, like the deluded traveler we can only hear it as; 'there is no water.'
Tactile and olfactory images also employ sensory deception in order to blur the distinction between reality and illusion.
Nature is often made a metaphor for humanity; 'sunken' and 'limp,' both are desperate for literal and spiritual regeneration.
Topographical aridity and personification illustrates the unbearable thirst suffered by both man and nature in images such as the; 'Dead mountain mouth of carious teeth that cannot spit."
De-familiarization also becomes an imperative replacement for narrative.
Water, like whiteness in the Heart of Darkness, becomes a paradox, connected to both sterility and fertility, as repeated depictions of polluted, dirty water manipulate its symbolic properties; 'The river sweats/ oil and tar."
Explicitly perverting water's regenerative elements reflects the absent promise of salvation through eternal life.
This fortifies the despondent mood engendered by images of false prophets and spiritual impotence that trap; 'hooded hordes swarming over endless plains, stumbling in cracked earth.'
Allusion becomes a dominant force in the poem as a metaphorical and literal; 'heap of broken images,' takes the place of a traditional narrative.
Cryptic cross-connections create a relational rather than sequential structure, as the significance of certain images only becomes apparent through their interaction with other allusions.
The difficulty of deciphering complex allusive networks enables the reader to undergo a crisis of understanding that engenders a sense of humiliation.
The overwhelming impossibility of understanding the allusive context of each image allows the reader to share the futility and failure plaguing the characters and age; 'We who were living are now dying/ with a little patience."
Understanding the poem's mood is frequently more important than understanding its story.
The absence of a conventional narrative structure often goes unnoticed, as mood proves a far more powerful method of conveying meaning.
Stead's argument that; ''texture' was all-important and 'structure' only a shadow,' can be used to support this.
Superficially, the amalgamation of assorted metrical and rhythmical patterns eliminates an external impression of structural order.
Form itself is paradoxical in the poem, as it appears simultaneously cyclical and disjointed.
If the narrative cannot be concurrently processual and cyclic, then fusing these forms may be the ultimate rejection of structure; by arguing that they cancel each other out, narrative and structure cease to exist to an extent.
But, the resultant assimilation of images without coherent, connective associations, generates an intentional chaos that becomes the poem's structure.
Although Eliot appears to have lost faith in the concept of narrative, the degree to which he truly rejects structure, is questionable.
Adopting a Cultural Materialist reading of the poem challenges Stead's opinion, as structure becomes vital if we believe it serves a representative purpose.
The surface impression of structural absence can be seen as deliberate if Eliot, like Conrad uses form to mirror society.
The seemingly random compendium of literary and mythical allusions, may sever the once coherent, admired words of others in order to replicate the destruction of stability and tradition engendered by war.
Abrupt syntactic shifts appear to convey the turbulence of an era characterized by sudden change and decaying social constancy.
Fusing varied poetic forms may be demonstrative of the difficulty inherent in establishing the European unity craved by many.
If so, Bradbury's argument gains credibility as he believes the poem's; 'ultimate strength' to be its; ''lack of 'purism', and its capacity to maintain a pragmatic and multi-directional momentum.'
How narrative is deployed and its significance inevitably differs between the texts, as each is the product of a divergent time and society, thus making it difficult to generalize regarding narrative function.
Both writers pioneer variants on the traditional narrative form that enable them to articulate their own unique concerns.
The extent to which this eliminates the necessity of narrative becomes questionable, as structure is what often allows them to do so with such success.
Narrative is not eradicated but altered; it may no longer appear in a familiar and recognizable from but it still exists.
Mood and complex character have not become an outright substitute for narrative but have become as structurally important.
Ironically, they do not replace interesting stories; rather they enable the writer to tell them.
Experimentation and progress is key in both literature and the Modern period; narrative seems to have become an evolutionary technique not a redundant one, leaving me inclined to agree with Guetti that; 'as the narrative develops it is redefined so as to deny the basic assumptions upon which it appears to be constructed.'
From the late eighteenth until the early nineteenth century, typically known as the 'Romantic' period in the history of literature, nature was used by poets to express to reader's notions and ideas that could not be expressed in the restricted 'rational' terms of conventional forms of writing which had preceded them.
This previous preoccupation with rational thought can explain why a mass of critical opinion towards Romantic poetry at the time was seen simply as nature writing.
The above quotation attempts to explain that the presentation of nature in Romantic writing is dependent on how it is perceived and interpreted, the 'observing consciousness' being not only that of the writer, but also in the reader's subjective inference.
With this in mind, it is easy to see from a critical perspective that a poet's 'overflowing of spontaneous emotion'  could have been the product of the direct influence of nature.
However, this opinion views descriptions of nature in poetry as 'a principle order, of which the ordering mind is part' , but what Romantic poetry typically embodied was the portrayal of nature as a 'principle of creation, of which the creative mind is a part' .
The period of 1780 through to 1830 was one of wars and revolutions that was to inspire poets such as William Blake and William Wordsworth, of whose poetical works I shall later explore, to convey their own personal experience an environment and society that was drastically changing before them.
By using images of nature in their poetry, Blake and Wordsworth were to challenge contemporary values such as the hopes of emancipation carried by the French revolution and the fears of the sweeping changes brought about by the industrial revolution.
A period of half a century cannot be generalised into particular views or opinions through, as each individual poet had their own set of ideas, beliefs and ways of viewing the world.
William Blake's use of nature in his poetry was highly symbolic, and left the reader to translate the meaning that images the images conveyed because according to Eugell  it was the 'only way truth can be received or communicated'.
Because language itself is a social construction, it was necessary for Blake to use symbolism to reveal the 'truth' about the world because the imagination of the human mind primarily forms understanding about a subject through symbols and images.
Symbols are the language of the mind.
Symbolism was an effective method of communication for Blake because when the symbols are decoded in the imaginative workings of the reader's mind, the meaning of the poem and the poet's vision are revealed, achieving a deep level of belief and understanding between poet and reader.
For example, in the poem The SICK ROSE, found in Blake's Songs of Innocence and Experience, we are told the allegorical tale of a rose being devoured by a worm, in which Blake seemingly illustrates the spiritual destruction of an unknown feminine object: The 'Rose' that Blake refers to could very well be a woman that he knew, whilst at the same time the word 'Rose' may have been used as a binary opposition to 'sick', for in Sir Geoffrey Keynes's illustrated edition of Songs we are able to see that the title reveals this contrast with the words 'The SICK ROSE'.
Clearly the capitalisation of 'SICK' and 'ROSE' underscoring 'The' reveals the twin themes of the poem, the 'contrary states of the human spirit' that Blake wished to express through Songs.
Yet the true meaning of the poem, perhaps due the shortness of it, has left it open to a wide range of critical interpretation.
A popular reading of it assumes that 'Rose' is a woman, who indulges in a passionate affair at 'night' and the 'worm' represents the masculine presence.
Damon  thinks that the 'worm' represents the 'lust/love of experience', which can be seen as sexual intercourse, that comes at night to destroy 'innocent/ pure minded love' , a notion of love that 'Rose' may have had and experienced prior to her love affair.
A more generalised reading of the poem but one which gives increased scope and significance to its meaning would be that the poem represents 'earthly love in its sickness' , envisioning the 'Rose' as a representation of 'earthly love'.
This reading can be elaborated on by Gardner , who sees the worm as an agent spreading the disease of 'Urizenic control' by way of the 'intellectual and social effects of false religion'.
Urizen, a fictional God created by Blake, constructed from the world's tyrants and dictators throughout the years.
Urizen's represented the many different Gods of the religions of the world which were, in Blake's opinion, designed to create a sense of fear in their followers.
This in turn creates a degree of 'control' for the dominant figures in the hierarchal structure of a particular religion, which in the case of Blake was the Church of England.
The sense of dominant control over the 'intellectual' processes of people can be closely compared to the dominant control that the government or bureaucratic reign had over the population of England, and especially France, the anger of which lead to the revolution.
Whether the 'Rose' is an actual person, a symbol of femininity or the representation of love, the illustration to the poem shows that the rose is restricted by its thorns and a woman in the picture is impaled on them.
This could represent the concealment of sexual freedom, the expression of the rose's desires presumably limited by the 'thorns' of social and religious oppression.
This restriction is given added effect in the tightly composed poetical structure, and the repressed desires that drive the poem's rhythm seem to pulsate downwards in terms of what Pagliaro  describes as 'her guilty and frightened feelings, in painful compensation of her pleasure'.
In this respect, the worm could be the rose's 'guilty' shame' for having sexual feelings, a shame created by an oppressive society and religion.
The apparent lack of a stable rhythm in the poem can be viewed as the inner turmoil or 'howling storm' that rages within her, either in an erotic dream or her unconscious, hidden side symbolically referred to as 'the night'.
In addition to using nature to represent his concerns in the material world, Blake also used natural images to symbolise his own beliefs.
In the eyes of Blake, the material world was created after a cosmic catastrophe caused the fall of spiritual beings into matter, but a reintegration with cosmic and spiritual oneness was eventually inevitable.
The theme of this 'fall' is recurrent in many of Blake's poems, and the contemplation of it is seen in the poem The Tyger, particularly in the opening lines: The poem, with its simple AABB rhyme scheme and its four beat rhythm is easy to follow, and takes the form of the narrator asking a tiger if it knows of its origins.
The narrator seems in awe of its majestic presence, and the 'immortal hand or eye' appears to be God, as he is the only thing immortal to Blake and so the poem would seen to be questioning the nature of the tiger's creation.
Friedlander  believes that The Tyger is a message conveyed to people of conventional and rational thought by having their 'reason overwhelmed' by facing the 'reality of the tyger', a creature of such a predatory nature and at the same time so beautiful in its appearance that it defies a rational explanation as to its origins of creation.
However, the poem is, as we have seen with The SICK ROSE, the symbolisation of a deeper meaning, and its simple rhythmic rhyme structure disguises its complex ideas.
This becomes apparent upon viewing the poems accompanying imagery, showing a tiger that appears anything but 'fearful'.
The spelling of tiger, spelt 'Tyger' is purposeful and this leads to a number of different assumptions of what Blake meant the Tyger to symbolise.
As with The SICK ROSE and many other poems, Blake can use 'the night' to refer to a hidden part of the human soul, sometimes known as the unconscious, whether acknowledged in dreams or by meditative contemplation.
It would be wrong to accept Friedlander's views, because of our knowledge of Blake's spiritual views of the world and the importance that he places in his reader's imaginative powers of creating meaning through his text.
It appears that Friedlander has read the explicit meaning of the poem and not taken into full account the importance Blake placed on symbolism.
It seems that Frye  would have a more imaginatively perceptive view on the poem, as he describes its theme as 'the struggle to create, and the loving contemplation of what has been created'.
This would assume that the Tyger is merely a concept and product of the narrator's contemplation and thoughts of a material object  that is distorted and 'created' by the imagination to form a unique vision in the mind of the individual, hence the sharp impression that the word 'Tyger' appears to make in one's imagination compared to that of the seemingly gentler 'tiger'.
Eugell  elaborates on Frye's idea of creation and contemplation by explaining that for Blake, 'imagination is an energy or force that creates and transforms as it perceives'.
This idea of an 'energy or force' associates itself with Blake's religious belief that God, although separate from the material world, in the act of creation has placed an eternal and divine force within each of his creations, and that the 'divine' force within humanity is the imagination.
This makes it clarifies the notion that the object of the narrator's thought is internal, rather than external.
Eugell goes on to say that in 'seeing nature with imaginative vision, we enliven and rescue it, and save our own souls'  and that 'imagination creates reality'.
Hence, as the narrator is contemplating the tiger in it's imaginative form known as The Tyger, a transcendence with the spiritual world is being achieved because the narrator is no longer experiencing the restricting boundaries of the material world, and is viewing the world as he knows it through the eyes of a person that is not aware of the dominant and socially constructed rules of space and time.
This is what Blake wanted his poetry to achieve in the reader, the deep symbolisation inciting the imagination into a dimension of perception, where reality is perpetually being redefined.
This refreshed state of mind leads to a clearer outlook towards the material world, opening the reader's eyes and raising questions about the previously unquestioned and given rules of society.
Even if the reader is not physically able to change the deeply hierarchal structures of society, the re-ignition of imaginative passions helps to 'save our own souls'.
Redemption and emancipation ran through many of Blake's poems in his prophetic bid to prepare humanity for an eventual return to what he believed was the infinite world of the divine.
Readers of Blake's poetry, especially the Romantic poets that followed him, have been inspired by his way of looking at the world at a time of great social and political oppression by tyrannical governments and religions.
One poet that greatly admired his work was William Wordsworth, whose time spent on working on a collection of poetry with Samuel Taylor Coleridge in 1797-8, in a year of passionate creativity, produced one of the seminal works of the Romantic period: the Lyrical Ballads.
Within Lyrical Ballads is one of Wordsworth's most well known poems , Lines written a few miles from Tintern Abbey, which is a first person narrated contemplation of the poet's self intermingled with descriptions of perceived natural surroundings.
Coleridge  stated that the imagination was considered to act as either 'primary or secondary'.
Primary imagination refers to the perception of the world created by the senses.
An example of Wordsworthian primary imagination is found in the opening stanza of Tintern Abbey, where the narrator, presumably Wordsworth himself, describes his perceived environment: The natural images in this passage are not a description of what Wordsworth can see; we know this because he wrote the poem upon leaving the area in which it was written.
What is important to note when reading this passage is that the narrative is focused on the centrality of the subject, a viewpoint that most of the poems contained in Lyrical Ballads express.
The 'I' in the first line here refers to the poet's self, and in the self-acknowledgement 'I see' we are able to experience Wordsworth's descent from 'primary' into his 'secondary' imagination.
The structure of the poem plays a key role in conveying Wordsworth's internal state.
The iambic pentameter rhythm regulates the sporadic blank verse, a technique that mirrors Wordsworth's state of half-conscious control over the fluxing images he perceives.
The blank verse also conveys a sense of reality and accessibility in terms of communicating thoughts and emotions in the most direct way possible, not restricted by a rhyme scheme in order for it to register at the most basic level of the reader's comprehension.
Stabler  notes that in this way the reader is permitted 'a more direct access to what Wordsworth called our 'elemental feelings''.
The descriptions of natural images, which are the symbolic language of Wordsworth's mind, are blended into the self-aware descriptions of Wordsworth's emotional state so that there is no distinction between what is perceived by the senses and what is created by the imagination.
This would imply that in the state that Wordsworth is experiencing in this passage, the senses are only half-creating Wordsworth's perception of the environment, and that they are half created by the unifying ideals of what his unconscious mind wants them to appear as.
The observation of this state of consciousness is referred to elsewhere in the poem.
A grammatical technique used to demonstrate this is seen in repetition of the word 'h', in the line 'hedgerows - hardly hedgerows'.
The linking effect produced by the repetition of 'h' allows the poem's descriptions to flow in the same way as his imagination so that there are no distinctions made between his observations, creating a sense of wholeness and forming a unique mental image for the reader similar to the one perceived by Wordsworth himself.
In this way the reader is able to experience the poem using nature as a symbolically relevant tool in exploring the creative and emotional inner workings of Wordsworth's thoughts.
The vivid sensation of the intense descriptions are given further strength by the artistic imagery drawn by Wordsworth in the lines 'and wreaths of smoke/ Sent up in silence from among the trees'.
Once again we witness the linking of soft sounds in the repetition of the word 's', and the image of the smoke has the quality of a painting, described as a 'wreath'.
This associated imagery builds on the impression that Wordsworth is painting a mental picture that comprises of a unifying wholeness, which is due to Wordsworth's thoughts and impressions flowing freely in his mind and in close association.
The 'silence' is observed because of the quietness of his internal perception, indicating that the sense of sound is not operating in his acknowledgement of his existence.
In reality, the smoke would have come from industrial factories that were built in the area of Tintern Abbey, but in choosing not to admit the perception of industrialisation into his description, Wordsworth's imaginative powers transform his sense of reality into an ideal external environment.
Stabler  states that in many of Wordsworth's poems 'comparable moments of transition are usually recognitions of absence'.
The recognition of the 'Smoke' provides the reader with the sense that Wordsworth is aware of the industrialisation of the countryside, but chooses to reject the unsightly appearance that the area of Tintern Abbey has developed since his last visit.
In this way, Wordsworth is able to create a picture of the surrounding countryside using his knowledge of what it had previously appeared like to him before the factories were built.
This is a very subtle use of the technique that Blake employs in his Songs, where states of innocence and experience co-exist alongside each other and are interchangeable.
Here Wordsworth expresses his experience of the industrial revolution with the effects it has  but chooses to view the world through an optimistic and romantically idealised manner by refusing to acknowledge the factories that create the smoke.
It is not only his perception of the area that is recreated, but also his outlook on life through his re-connection with the natural world seen in the lines: Nature here is seen as a place to refresh Wordsworth's thoughts and clear his mind of modern life, thoughts of which drift around his conscious being as the 'still, sad music of humanity'.
The sense of loss that Wordsworth feels for his absent 'thoughtless youth' is given a 'power'.
This 'power' is seemingly generated by Wordsworth's 'simply being aware of loss'  and the feeling acquired form this awareness allows the poet to transcend his previous state and recognise a 'different mode of being' .
The 'power' created is thus not from external influences, but from a descent into the 'secondary' imagination.
The poet is no longer speaking on an 'elementary' level of 'I am', or as witnessed in the previously discussed passage, 'I feel', but is now operating on the level of 'I am thought'.
The utterance towards the plural subject is the deepest form of self-expression known to human understanding, from ancient times through to our current post-Freud knowledge of the self.
The effect that it has in the reader is one of vicarious insight into the way symbolic 'secondary' imagination provides thoughts and language to the 'primary' imagination by working out 'a voice adjusted to the self's intimacy' .
It is also clear to see how Wordsworth acquired his 'Pantheistic' views on spirituality, a view that assumes that God is the power that runs through all living things in the universe.
We see this because as natural images permit his imagination to run wild, he feels a 'power'.
This power is not described as a specific deity, as Blake thought, but merely a presence that is felt in his transcendent state of mind.
The assumption that there is a force in nature and the mind of man is reached by the association 'of ideas in a state of excitement' .
This excitement in Wordsworth is comparable to similar notions of spiritual energy in Blake, in that nature manifests 'the same transcendental energy as informs the human mind' , whilst the same time providing an 'objective, material barrier'  for the subject to recognise the transcendence without the risk of being completely overwhelmed by his internal processes.
There is a sense of doubt in Wordsworth's belief though, as it is only a feeling that he experiences, and not a certainty.
This, however, is typical of Wordsworth's style, a poet whom, even in his beliefs refuses to reduce his thoughts and ideas to fixities and densities.
Although of contrasting backgrounds and different beliefs, the parallels running through the works of the poets discussed have been clearly observed through the use of natural images; revolutionary thoughts and ideas about rigid hierarchal structures such as the Church of England and the government, expressions of the self and of individual perceptions of the world.
Through nature, poets have also expressed a belief in the unifying and redemptive power that the self-awareness of creative thought brings, and its subsequent feelings of oneness with a divine or spiritual level of existence, and not merely conventional notions of deity.
Even though Blake believed spiritual transcendence needed to be achieved through concentrated thought and Wordsworth was of the opinion that transcendence was a natural reaction to the external environment, both poets have excelled far beyond simple nature writing.
They, and many other poets of the period have created works that show that by using natural images a primary and 'elementary' language can be constructed to inform us of the nature of humanity.
Price  can provide a suitable summary to encapsulate the notion of what both Blake and Wordsworth attempted to convey to their readers: 'The strength of Experience comes from its ability to sustain or recover the faith of innocence'.
In this way, the newly informed reader is prepared to meet the world with either the despair of passive hopelessness, or with a revived sense active dynamism and refreshed perspective.
The project started with the idea to work on Charles Dickens's Oliver Twist  since it is the subject of my dissertation for the English Masters.
I first thought not to intervene in the text itself but in the 'before'or in the 'after'text.
Nancy and the Artful Dodger have important roles in the development of the plot; however, little is said about them and their origins.
Their actions are related to Oliver's story.
Consequently, it might have been interesting to focus on the reasons why they became a prostitute for Nancy and a pickpocket for the Artful Dodger.
An intervention of that kind would have been a prelude, the extension of the "text 'before'  the events it represents."
A postlude, the extension of the "text  'after' the events it represents", was not possible with the character of Nancy since she is killed by Sikes at the end of the story.
However, a postlude concerning the Dodger's was a possibility.
When he is taken to prison, the young pickpocket replied to the Bench's sentence "You'll pay for this, my fine fellows.
I wouldn't be for you for something!"
The postlude could have focused on the Dodger's imprisonment and could have included an escape for example and his 'return' and 'revenge'.
All these ideas sounded very pleasant to explore but they were not of great interest for the subject of my dissertation since it is on Charles Dickens's treatment of London.
As a consequence, the following project took another turn and I chose to work on the notion of time and to set Oliver Twist in modern times.
Hence, I would have to study Dickens's London as it was in the nineteenth-century and as it is in his novel together with today's London and try to combine them.
Hence, the ideas of writing a prelude or a postlude were given up, however it might have been interesting to develop them and consequently I chose to mention them in the introduction of the commentary.
Peter Ackroyd wrote "London created Dickens, just as Dickens created London.
.
London entered his soul; it terrified him and it entranced him.
It became the material for his fantasy and the arena for his polemic.
And, in the end, it was truly Dickens's London."
As for Elaine Saunders, she argues "To Dickens, London was a loving, breathing entity of which he had an enduring fascination.
He loved its diversity yet hated its inequalities, and his descriptions of sights, sounds, and smells of the city are among the more evocative passages in English literature."
In Dickens's novels, London became a character in itself; it was treated almost as an animate presence and thus became what Ackroyd calls "Dickens's London".
The aim of the project was to rewrite Dickens's London as it might have been if it had been written today and not in the nineteenth-century.
The idea was to choose a passage in Oliver Twist and to 'translate' it into our present world and words.
A first rewriting was made, if the result tackled aspects different from the initial plan, it nevertheless, did not work on London and a second rewriting became necessary.
The aim of this commentary is to explain how ideas came and evolved.
It first focuses on the novels and films which helped me in the composition.
It then comments on the two're-written' passages and on the important issues brought up by these compositions but also on the problems which I encountered.
My first work was to find some materials which could help me in the 'modernizing' process of the action and would give me a better idea of today's image of London or the city in general.
In order to stick to the spirit of Oliver Twist, the research had to focus on children or teenagers in poor or low areas.
The study of their daily lives, activities and their language could be helpful tools in the Oliver Twist rewriting.
The first two sources turned to be useful for the composition but to a certain extent.
To start, I watched Sweet Sixteen .
Ken Loach's film presents the lives of today's teenagers in poor suburbs.
Liam, the young hero, has many problems facing him every day, including small time crime such as stealing cars and vandalism.
The story relates his descent into the criminal and drug underworld.
As far as the rewriting was concerned, it could re-use some aspects of Ken Loach's film, concerning teenager's daily life such as eating fast-food or smoking but also their physical appearances - wearing cap and trainers for example, and their language - the use of slangy if not rude terms.
I then turned to literature and to Irvine Welsh's Trainspotting .
The novel is similar to Ken Loach's film in many respects.
Similarly, it presents problems of drug, antisocial misdeeds.
Nevertheless, both the film and the novel were inadequate for the main purpose of the rewriting since their action takes place in Scotland and the idea of the composition was to work on London.
Moreover, the characters speak in Scottish and their language and vocabulary is probably very different from those of the Londoners.
However, both sources eventually became key elements in the project, since they brought up the idea to work on language and accent.
This aspect would be explored later in this commentary.
Materials which could be considered as helpful had to be set in London.
Hence, I came to Zadie Smith's White Teeth .
Smith deliberately rewrites Dickensian London from the perspective of immigrant communities, however her novel turned to be poor in descriptions of London and the focus is more on certain groups of people living in the capital.
White Teeth well underlines that today's London is a multicultural city, a place full of people from different origins.
The novel particularly focuses on Indian and Caribbean immigrants.
Zadie Smith makes her character Clara speak English with Caribbean accent.
This linguistic devise brings a lot to the novel which sounds more exotic but also realistic.
I thus decided to integrate the multicultural landscape of London in my rewriting since it is indeed an actual contemporary aspect.
However, Zadie Smith's novel turned to be not very helpful in terms of external descriptions of the city, of its atmosphere.
In that respect, Sam Selvon's The Lonely Londoners  proved to be a wonderful asset for my composition.
Sam Selvon is himself part of the great Caribbean immigration to Britain after World War Two.
His novel deals with the Black British experience, telling the story of a group of Caribbean immigrants and their struggles in postwar London.
Both the characters and the narrator's language follow Caribbean idioms and rhythms.
In that respect, it is similar to Zadie Smith's White Teeth, but Sam Nelvon's novel also focuses on London and its atmosphere.
His treatment of London is reminiscent of Charles Dickens's.
Sam Selvon writes "London is a place like that.
It divide up in little worlds".
Dickens's London is also divided with its class division between the rich people such as Mr. Brownlow or the Maylies and the poor such as street children.
Both the nineteenth and twentieth novelists pay close attention to the fog as "London particular".
If we consider the two following descriptions "one grim winter evening, when it had a kind of unrealness about London, with a fog sleeping over the city" and "the ground was covered, nearly ankle-deep with filth and mire; a thick steam, perpetually rising from the reeking bodies of the cattle, and mingling with the fog, which seemed to rest upon the chimney-tops, hung heavily above", at first sight both quotes seem to be from the same pen, however more than a century separates them.
Both Dickens and Selvon are careful in their treatment of London.
The capital takes an important part in the general atmosphere of the plots.
Hence, The Lonely Londoners was the perfect source for the rewriting of Oliver Twist in today's world.
This novel gave me a clearer idea of the kind of rewriting my project was aiming at.
After looking for helpful materials, the second stage was to tackle Oliver Twist itself.
As the aim of the composition was to rewrite Dickens's novel as it would have been today, the idea was to find a passage and rearrange it .
The result had to sound as a contemporary work but it had to be done in keeping with the original Oliver Twist's spirit.
The passage had to be selected carefully, the rewriting would be all the more relevant if the chosen extract presented several characteristics of Dickens's treatment of London.
This is the reason why I finally decided to work on two different passages as the first that I had chosen did not eventually cover all the aspects I wished to tackle in the 'modernizing' process.
The following lines of this essay focus and comment on the rewritings of the two chosen passages of Oliver Twist and explains how they took shape, evolved and eventually became what they are.
The first scene selected is extracted from Chapter XV.
It takes place just after Oliver has been taken in and nursed by Mr. Brownlow.
At this point of the story, the young hero is sent by the elderly gentleman to return back some books to the shop.
On his way to the bookstall, the young hero takes a wrong turn and is captured by Nancy and Bill Sikes.
To chose this passage proved to be advantageous for several reasons.
First, it takes place in the streets of London.
Secondly, it combines dialogue and narration.
This gave me a larger scope for the rewriting since I could work on characterization - the way that the characters are represented and the setting.
However, I eventually realized that it was particularly the dialogues which had made me select this passage.
In the readings that I had done at first, I had encountered so many references to multicultural society, read English spoken with different accents that my first concern was now to work on language rather than anything else.
White Teeth presents two different groups of immigrants: Indian and Caribbean people.
These latter are also the focus of The Lonely Londoners.
In Charles Dickens's Oliver Twist, only Fagin, also called 'the Jew' belongs to a different culture and has his origin given.
I decided that the rewriting should underline London as a multicultural landscape, a phenomenon which is true today.
A whole set of different origins had to be included.
Fagin became 'the Hindu man' even if Dickens makes him look miserable, I viewed him as a very cunning person and I thought that the piercing black eyes of an Indian would suit him very well.
The Jew's "matted red-hair" had just to be turned into black and he was a perfect Indian.
Barney is a very minor character who is little mentioned in Oliver Twist.
However, he became one of the key elements of the rewriting.
Dickens makes him speak with a peculiar accent.
Barney's n's become d's and his m's turn out to be b's.
The reader is not told his origin or the reason of the character's pronunciation.
It might be the accent of the lower class or simply a speech problem.
Nevertheless, it gave me the idea to make him a Caribbean man.
Barney's pronunciation were reminiscent of Clara's, Zadie Smith's heroine who is unable to say correctly the th's, for example "I alreddy say : if ya nah like it, den send da damn ting back.
I bought it'cos I taut you like it."
Finally, because I had watched Sweet Sixteen and read Trainspotting, I had studied Scottish accent, and I was wishing to use this new knowledge.
I thus decided to make one of the characters a Scotsman.
Being the only remaining man present in this passage, Bill Sikes became a Scottish man.
Moreover, to a certain extent, Sikes could be associated with the drug dealer and abusive boyfriend of Liam's mother in Sweet Sixteen since he is also a criminal who abuses of Nancy.
Once I had given different origins to the characters, I had to work on the language, the pronunciation and the vocabulary in order to make the 'rewritten' characters' words sound realist.
With the help of the novels that I had read before and several internet websites, I made up some kind of Caribbean and Scottish English dictionaries and I then translated almost verbatim what Dickens's characters say or I kept at least the same idea when it was too complex.
As far as the Indian/Jew was concerned I did not give him any accent for two reasons.
First, Zadie Smith makes her Hindu characters speak English with the classic accent and secondly it might have been excessive to present three different pronunciations in such a little passage.
Hence, I had my Caribbean/Scottish version of Oliver Twist.
The multicultural aspect of today's London was recaptured, however, the 'Scottish dimension' was not really satisfying.
In literature as well as in real life, it is not commonplace to hear of Scottish immigrants in London, especially when compared to Indian or Caribbean immigrants who actually form important communities in the capital.
I thought that it had to be replaced by something more related to London and the idea of making Sikes a Cockney came.
He would not be an immigrant, on the contrary he would be a Londoner -a real Londoner.
I thus started to study Cockney pronunciation and vocabulary and I rewrote Sikes as a Cockney "droppin h's, g's and doin the glo'al stop" or speaking in rhyming slang.
This new composition was more in keeping with the focus of the rewriting since it added a contemporary phenomenon of London.
Moreover, I discovered that Oliver Twist had been a source for some rhyming slang.
'Oliver Twist' is the rhyming slang for 'fist' while 'the Artful dodger' is the one for 'lodger'.
If Oliver Twist had made Cockney, Cockney could make my rewriting.
Adding to the linguistic exercise, I had to adapt the passage and the story in order to make it sound normal for today.
Modern objects were introduced such as the television or the 'baked beans' tin which is so popular today and also modern notions such as The Big Issue.
Concerning the notion of orphan, it seemed to me that it also had to be adapted.
I resorted to insert the idea of a host family which sounds more modern than the system of the parish.
Mr. Brownlow would be referred today as Oliver's host family and because of the term 'family' I created a Mrs.Brownlow.
Finally some changes were needed as far as the plot was concerned.
The anecdote of the sister looking for her runaway brother does not sound credible today.
People would not walk the streets for days but would simply go to the police.
As a consequence, I made up the story of the group of children in holidays and visiting London.
The supervisor looking for a runaway child seems more probable today than the sister after her brother.
Moreover, this scheme allowed me to keep the reference of Nancy being dressed up.
In Dickens, she is dressed as a 'good girl' with her "bonnet, apron basket and street-door keys."
In the modern rewriting, she wears the clothes of a supervisor of a holiday camp with her orange cap, her shirt and her banner bearer.
Secondly, I decided to relocate the scene.
As I had introduced the touristic aspect, I chose to set the rewriting in Soho instead of Clerkenwell.
As Soho is close to Regent Street, I could easily include the allusion to Hamleys toy shop.
Moreover, today's pickpockets are more likely found in such tourist places.
If the Artful Dodger and Master Charley Bates steal a silk handkerchief from Mr. Brownlow in Dickens, they would probably have stolen his mobile phone or digital camera if it was today.
Instead of the bookstall episode, I imagined that the elderly gentleman would be in front of a Chinese shop giving his wife a ring to know the ingredients she needed for their dinner.
The young pickpockets would steal his mobile while he would be looking at the shop-window.
Hence, as in Dickens, the rewriting presents Oliver going back to the very same place where he met Mr. Brownlow and for an errand similar to the one which brought the old man there that day.
The 'rewritten' Oliver goes to Soho to buy cooking ingredients.
To maintain the idea of Oliver's having a book with him, I introduced the anecdote that he takes a cookery book with him in order to have the list of the ingredients required for the recipe.
Having a book was necessary for the rest of the action since Sikes uses it to bully the young boy.
In order to rewrite Oliver Twist in today's life several aspects had to be adapted - modernized and updated so that the story was still credible.
I had now completed my rewriting but I realized that I had eventually missed my main focus: London itself.
The rewriting might include the multicultural dimension of the capital and mentioned a district  and a shop , but it was all.
It did not explore the peculiar atmosphere of the Dickensian city and try to recreate it in today's world.
Consequently, I decided to make a second composition and I looked for another extract.
The second passage chosen takes place in chapter VIII, earlier in the story than the first one.
Oliver has just runaway from his native town and reached London "- that great place!".
He meets the Artful Dodger in Barnet, a coaching town near London.
From there, the two children walked to Fagin's and Dickens relates their journey through London by night.
This passage was interested for several reasons.
First, it mentioned the names of several places, streets or buildings of the capital.
Secondly, it describes the streets of a poor and squalid neighborhood -Saffron Hill- at Dickens's time.
Finally, part of the passage takes place indoors, in Fagin's house.
At first, I wished to relocate the scene in a different area; maybe Harrow Road to give an echo to The Lonely Londoners or simply in a sector which is today a red light area, a poor sector or a place associated to gangster activity such as Brick Lane.
However, I eventually judged that it might be a too important intervention.
Keeping Dickens's locations and geography would be more interesting in terms of evolution.
My first task was to find what the places mentioned by Dickens had become today in order to adapt the rewriting.
For example, at the time when Dickens wrote, the Angel was "a coaching inn, the first post outside of the City of London  a new building in pale terracotta stone with a corner cupola replaced the old building in 1899" and stayed the same untill now.
Dickens mentions it because it was a "local landamark", however, today, it is only the building of a cooperative bank.
Consequently, if I wanted to keep it in the rewriting, I had to refer to what distinguishes it today, its cupola.
Concerning the turnpike at Islington, I was unable to find what the building is now, so I had to genearalize and I replaced it by the Tube station located in Islington - Highbury & Islington.
Similarly, I included Angel station and in terms of building, the workhouse became the job centre.
Hence I modernized the boy's journey through London.
Added to that, I introduced the anecdote of the terrorist events.
It seemed to me that the very long journey that the boys undertake was an anachronism.
People would rather take the Tube or the bus today.
The mentioning of the potential terrorist attacks could justify the walk.
The Artful Dodger chooses to go on foot for fear of being searched by the police watching over the Tube after recent terrorist attacks.
Moreover, this reference was in keeping with today's reality.
As far as Oliver is concerned, he thinks that the Artful Dodger does not want to take the underground for fear of a bombing.
This version also maintained Oliver's innocence and naivety underlined in Dickens when he thinks that the Jew is an honest man for example.
The second task was to work on the descriptions of the streets of Saffron Hill.
Dickens describes them as "dirty", "muddy" and writes that "the air was impregnated with filthy odours".
In the 'modernizing' process, the mud was replaced by the bins spilling out, the "filthy odours" changed into the nauseating smell of frying food and the polluted air.
I added the allusion to the restaurants - Chinese, Kebab, fish and chips because we can find them today in almost every popular street.
Concerning the inhabitants of the place, the rewriting remained faithful to Dickens, I just included the notion of prostitution with "the women scantily dressed and wearing heavy make-up".
Finally, I had to rewrite Fagin's house.
First I had to modernize it: the candle became electricity and light, the fire became a heater and a microwave, and the table's material became plastic.
In terms of food and alimentation, I tried to emphasize the modern notion of fast food with "the loaf and butter" being replaced by KFC but also tins and cans.
Concerning the stolen wipes, they became mobile phones and cameras which, instead of being washed as the wipes,are taken apart in order to resell the pieces for example.
To make the rewriting more challenging and to use my reading of Selvon's novel, I decided to do an exercise of collage - "the sticking together of potentially relevant bits of texts."
I selected some passages of The Lonely Londoners and included them in my rewriting word for word.
These added 'bits' brought several new aspects to the composition, political party signs in the streets, cigarettes on Fagin's floor.
Moreover, it allowed fusing the voices of these two novelists - Selvon and Dickens, who both give such a peculiar attention to London.
Another challenge was to maintain Dickens's style, in other word to recreate his long and complex sentences.
For example, if we take the following extract "There was a deal table before the fire: upon which were a candle, stuck in a ginger-beer bottle, two or three pewter pots, a loaf and butter, and a plate", the rewriting modernizes almost everything mentioned in the original text while keeping the same grammatical structure : "There was a plastic table before an old oil-filled radiator: upon which were a heap of ash, stuck in a used baked-bean tins, two or three coke cans, a greasy KFC bag, and a plate."
Similarly, I tried to keep to the idea of the string holding the frying pan on the fire with the electric wire linking the microwave to the plug.
Concerning the "toasting fork", I wished I had found a modern equivalent but as I did not, I preferred to keep it as it was since it has a strong symbolical meaning.
It presents Fagin as an Ogre ready to eat the little boy.
Hence, my second rewriting was completed and was a good counterpart to the first one since it tackled different aspects.
However, once again, I realized that I had not explored some issues that I had initially planned to introduce in the composition.
For example, I wished I could have worked on the character of Nancy.
What would be her situation today?
Would she be a prostitute?
Similarly, how could I explain a gang of waifs converted into pickpockets in today's London?
Orphan children are no longer in the streets.
Still a lot could be said but I had already discovered so much by only rewriting two very short passages.
I have watched a film, read several novels, 'learnt' English spoken by Scottish and Caribbean people, I knew "everythin' about Co'ney and would be'er understand East Enders!"
I had learnt about immigration in England.
I was now familiar with London in Oliver Twist, I could now picture exactly where the characters are in London at any time of the story.
The composition was short but all I had leant was great...and what would it have been if I had rewritten the whole novel?
"Is anybody here, Barney?"
inquired Fagin; speaking now that Sikes was looking on; without raising his eyes from the television.
"Mi a go check dat" replied Barney whose accent confirmed the origin of his back complexion.
After a few minutes, he came back and informed that the Kebab shop was very quiet.
"Nobody?"
inquired Fagin in a tone of surprise : which perhaps mean that Barney was at liberty to tell the truth.
"Nubady, jus de likkle ooman", replied Barney.
"Nancy!"
exclaimed Sikes "Where?
Ain't seen 'e today.
'av to see'e.
She's bloody amazin'!"
"She a heat jus a plate o'hegg an beans" replied Barney.
"Send 'er 'ere", said Sikes, pouring out a glass of whiskey.
"Send 'er 'ere."
Barney looked timidly at Fagin, as if for permission; the old Hindu remained silent, and not lifting his eyes from the television, the Caribbean man retired and returned, ushering in Nancy, who was still wearing her 'Holidays 4 Kids' shirt and her orange cap.
"Awright, darlin'?
Ye still o' i'?"
inquired Sikes, proffering the glass.
"Yes, I'm still on it Bill" replied the young woman, disposing of its contents; "and so fed up of it, too.
The little chap is probably feeling sick or something and just staying at home or" "Ah, Nancy, love!"
said Fagin, looking away from the screen.
Now, whether a peculiar contraction of the Indian's raven-black eyebrows, and a half-closing of his deeply-set eyes, warned Nancy that she was disposed to be too communicative, is not a matter of much importance.
The fact is all we need care for here; and the fact is, that she suddenly checked herself, and with several gracious smiles upon Mr. Sikes, turned the conversation to other matters.
In about ten minutes' time, Mr. Fagin was seized with a fit of coughing; upon which Nancy put her cap on her head, and declared it was time to go.
The Cockney, finding that he was walking a short part of her way himself, expressed his intention of accompanying her; they went away together, followed, at a little distance, by the dog, who slunk out of a back-yard as soon as his master was out of sight.
The Indian thrust his head out of the room door when Sikes had left it; looked after him as he walked up the dark passage; shook his clenched fist; muttered a deep curse; and then, with a horrible grin, re-seated himself at the table; where he was soon deeply absorbed in the interesting pages of the Sun.
Meanwhile, Oliver Twist little dreaming that he was within so short a distance from the Brownlows' cosy home, was on his way to his benefactors' favourite Chinese shop, situated in Soho, in order to buy the special soy sauce required for tonight's supper.
When he got out Oxford Circus Tube station, he accidentally turned down a by-street which was not exactly in his way; but not discovering his mistake until he had got halfway down it, and knowing it must lead in the right direction, he did not think it worth while to turn back; and so marched on, as quickly as he could, with the cookery book mentioning the soy sauce under his arm.
He was walking alone; thinking of the supper he would enjoy later; and how he would have done everything to share the meal with little Dick: who unloved and mistreated , might be bitterly weeping at that very moment in front of his plate of baked beans; when he was startled by a young woman screaming out very loud.
"Oh Oliver!
Thanks God!"
And he had hardly looked up, to see what the matter was, when he was stopped by having a pair of arms thrown tight round his neck.
"Hey", cried Oliver, struggling.
"What's your problem?
What do you want?"
The only reply to this, was a great number of loud lamentations from the young woman who had embraced him; and who was wearing a shirt of some children holiday camp, an orange cap and who was holding a banner-bearer.
"Oh, great!"
said the young woman, "I found you at least!
Oh!
Oliver!
Oliver!
Don't do that ever again!"
With these incoherent exclamations, the young woman burst into such a kind of hysterical fit, that a couple of elderly women who came up at the moment asked a Big Issue vendor with a shiny lip piercing, who was also looking on, whether he didn't think he had better run for a psychiatrist.
To which, the Big Issue vendor: who appeared of a lounging, not to say indolent disposition: replied, that he thought not.
"Okay now, let's be quick" said the young woman, grasping Oliver's hand; "we might still be on time for Madame Tussaud's.
Come on!
Come!"
"What's the matter, dear?"
inquired one of the women.
"Oh, ma'am," replied the young woman, "I told Oliver not to go to Hamleys because we had no time but he's such a stubborn little chap that he didn't listen to me and runaway when I turned my back.
I've been looking for him for three hours and we missed the London Eye!"
"Ah!
The new generation!"
said one of the women.
"You must listen to your supervisor, you naughty boy," said the other.
"I am not," replied Oliver, greatly alarmed.
"I am not with her; I am not here in holidays.
I live in Pentonville with my new host-family."
"Only hear him, how he argues with me!"
cried the young woman.
"Why, it's Nancy!"
exclaimed Oliver; who now saw her face for the first time; and started back, in irrepressible astonishment.
"You see he knows me!"
cried Nancy, appealing to the bystanders.
"He's making fun of me!
What would his parents say if they could see him, they pay him wonderful holidays to their son and that's the way he thanks them!"
"Blimey!
Good job!
Ye finds the boy" said a man, bursting out of a pub, with a little dog at his heels; "Oliva!
Never do i' again!
Now come wiv us!"
"I am not with them.
I don't know them.
Help!
Help!"
cried Oliver, struggling in the man's powerful grasp. "
'elp!"
repeated the man.
"Wud ya adam an eve i'!
Stop tellin' porkies!
Ill 'elp ya, dipstick!
Where did ye' alfinch this book?
Yav been stealin'it, 'av ye?"
With these words, the man tore the cookery book from his grasp, and struck him on the head.
"That's right!"
laughed a young man passing-by.
"That's the only way to cool him down" "Not so sure!
It could make you into trouble" said a street-sweeper, casting a disapproving look at the Cockney.
"It might do him some good!"
said the two women.
"An'e 'll get a bi'more!"
rejoined the man, administering another blow, and seizing Oliver by the collar.
"Come on, ye young devil!
'Ere, Bull's-mince, mind'im boy!
Mind 'im!"
Weak with recent illness; stupefied by the blows and the suddenness of the attack; terrified by the fierce growling of the dog, and the brutality of the man; overpowered by the conviction of the bystanders that he really was the naughty boy he was described to be; what could one poor child do.
Note 3 : Cockney drops 'H's at the beginning of words and syllables and 'G's at the ends.
Note 7 : Blimey : corruption of the oath 'God blind me'.
Used as an exclamation.
Also used in the form "blimey O'Riley".
"finds" : Cockney usually uses the present tense to speak of the past.
Note 8 : Oliva instead of Oliver : Cockney has vowel lowering.
Note 9 : Cockney English is characterized by its own special vocabulary and usage in the form of "cockney rhyming slang".
The way it works is that you take a pair of associated words where the second word rhymes with the word you intend to say, then use the first word of the associated pair to indicate the word you originally intended to say.
Adam and Eve - Rhyming Slang for 'believe', e.g.
"Would you Adam and Eve it mate!"
porky pies - Rhyming Slang for 'lies'.
Mostly shortened to 'porkies'.
i.e.
"You're tellin' porkies mate".
half inch - Rhyming Slang for 'pinch' .
Note 11 : Bull's-eye becomes Bull's-mince because mince pies - Rhyming Slang for eyes.
As John Dawkins objected to their taking the Tube, arguing that it was not safe at the moment, it was nearly eleven when they reached Highbury & Islington.
In front of the Tube station, Oliver noticed a police car and a few policemen from which he inferred that the underground was under police surveillance following the recent terrorist events and as the Dodger had argued before, staying 'over ground' was safer from any attacks.
They headed to Great North Road and passed before the former building of the Angel inn building with its distinctive cupola.
They then crossed from Angel station into St. John's Road; struck down the small street which terminates at Sadler's Wells theatre complex; through Exmouth Street and Coppice Row; down the little court by the side of the job centre; across the classic ground which once bore the name of Hockley-in-the-Hole; thence into little Saffron Hill; and so into Saffron Hill the Great: along which the Dodger scudded at a rapid pace, directing Oliver to follow close at his heels.
Although Oliver had enough to occupy his attention in keeping sight of his leader, he could not help bestowing a few hasty glances on either side of the way, as he passed along.
A dirtier or more wretched place he had never seen.
The street was very narrow and dirty.
Rests of food and filthy papers were spilling out of public bins.
The air was impregnated with queasy odours of frying food mixed up with pollution.
Some of the walls of the buildings had signs painted like Vote Labour and Down with the Tories.
There were a good many small restaurants, Chinese, kebab shops, fish and chips and a few shops; but the only stock in trade appeared to be heaps of children, who, even at that time of night, were crawling in and out at the doors, or screaming from the inside.
The sole places that seemed to prosper amid the general blight of the place, were the pubs; and in them, the lowest orders of London were wrangling with might and main.
Covered ways and yards, which here and there diverged from the main street, disclosed little knots of houses, where drunken men were positively wallowing in filth and women scantily dressed and wearing heavy make-up were loudly chating; and from several of the door-ways, great ill-looking fellows were cautiously emerging, bound, to all appearance, on no very well-disposed or harmless errands.
Oliver was just considering whether he hadn't better run away, when they reached the bottom of the hill.
His conductor, catching him by the arm, pushed open the door of a house near Field Lane; and, drawing him into the passage, closed it behind them.
"Now, then!"
cried a voice from below, in reply to a whistle from the Dodger.
"Plummy and slam!"
was the reply.
This seemed to be some watchword or signal that all was right; for the light turned on at the remote end of the passage; and a man's face peeped out, from where a balustrade of the old kitchen staircase had been broken away.
"There's two on you," said the man, switching on the entrance light and shading his eyes with his hand.
"Who's the t'other one?"
"A new mate," replied Jack Dawkins, pulling Oliver forward.
"Where did he come from?"
"Greenland.
Is Fagin up stairs?"
"Yes, he's a sortin' the stuff.
Up with you!"
The light was switched off, and the face disappeared.
Oliver, groping his way with one hand, and having the other firmly grasped by his companion, ascended with much difficulty the dark and damaged stairs: which his conductor mounted with an ease and expedition that showed he was well acquainted with them.
He threw open the door of a back-room, and drew Oliver in after him.
The walls and ceiling of the room were perfectly black with age and dirt.
The floor was dirty with footprints and cigarette butts.
There was a plastic table before an old oil-filled radiator: upon which were a heap of ash, stuck in empty baked-bean tins, two or three coke cans, a greasy KFC bag, and a plate.
In a microwave, which was on a corner of the table, and which was plugged in by a long and patched-up electric wire, some sausages were being reheated; and standing next it, with a toasting-fork in his hand, was a very old shriveled Indian, whose villainous -looking and repulsive face was obscured by a quantity of straight black hair.
He was dressed in a jacket that was brown one time, but black now with grease, and corduroy trousers, his throat was bare; and seemed to be dividing his attention between the microwave and a tool box lying open next to a great number of mobile phones and cameras which were probably being examined and repaired.
Several rough beds made of sleeping bags and old mattresses, were huddled side by side on the floor.
Seated round the table were four or five boys, none older than the Dodger, smoking roll-ups, and drinking spirits with the air of middle-aged men.
These all crowded about their associate as he whispered a few words to the Indian; and then turned round and grinned at Oliver.
So did the Indian himself, toasting-fork in hand.
"This is him, Fagin," said Jack Dawkins; "my friend Oliver Twist."
It is possible to suggest that the most clearly obvious way into both of these poems is on a graphological level; in both there is a distinct lack of punctuation.
"Pan Recipe" is structured as one sentence, although this is complicated by both the many clauses, and by the separation of the verse into paired lines.
"New World A-Comin'" is divided into three verses, each of which is also structure as one sentence.
In both texts this is indicated by capitalisation at the beginning of the verse and a full-stop at the end.
This is one of the techniques that give both these texts cohesion.
Both texts use lexical deviation as a method of foregrounding.
"New World A-Comin'" is riddled with examples of words which could have several meanings and functions.
This is often caused by graphological deviation; i.e.
where the line ends in relation to the words and phrases, and the way syntax is used.
The first three lines, for example, are particularly ambiguous in meaning.
The line break between "this"  and "leader"  makes us question the functions of both words; it is unclear as to whether "this" should be read as a demonstrative article or demonstrative noun.
If we take the former function, "leader" would be read as the pre-modified noun object of the phrase - a "Helpless.../leader"; if we take the latter "leader becomes adjectival and, if read as being hyphenated with "less" into a compound adjective , becomes part of a second simile.
It is likely to be the latter if we look at the paralleled structures between these lines and the repetition of "-less" as a suffix.
However, the syntax between lines two and three also confuses the word functions of both "leader"  and "less" .
This mode of foregrounding through deviation reoccurs frequently throughout the poem particularly at the beginning of the second verse.
In Agard's poem there is also foregrounding in the ambiguity of the meanings of words, which is consequent of semantic deviation.
The Caribbean poem is an extended metaphor in which Agard uses the vehicle of the steel pan to convey a sense of new life born out of the past.
This extended figurative structure is further complicated by the use of the term "Recipe", and the semantic language and clause structures associated with cooking.
Within the body of the poem itself are also many other examples of metaphor and also puns.
In line one, for example, the word "rape" could be understood in two ways, depending on what function we assign to it.
If we take the verb function of "rape" the line would read as a basic phrase structure meaning to 'despoil' "a people".
However, we could also read this in a figurative, metaphoric way by taking the noun definition of the word, where "rape" is a rich yellow plant, which would then be functioning adjectivally in the metaphoric structure to describe the people of the past, from which the present has been formed.
Both poems also use semantic deviation in the application of animating verbs and adjectives to non-animate objects.
In lines 19 and 20 of "New World A-Comin'" the adjectives "firm" and "fleshed" pre-modify the noun "flame" giving it human or animal like qualities.
However, "flame" and can also be read as a compound adjective with "warm" at the beginning of line 21, thus acting as a pre-modifier itself in the noun phrase in which the "warriors" act as the head noun.
This is another example of graphological deviation.
In "Pan Recipe" the use of the present simple verb "stifle" animates the "drum", since a drum does not play itself.
The verb is usually used in reference to the suppression, curbing, suffocation, or repression of a person or animal; these are the normal paradigms.
Such foregrounding through deviation makes us think deeper about the meaning.
If we read it as a metaphor and set it against the rest of the poem, we might take the drum to represent the steel pan music of the "people".
Music is an abstract noun which, in a sense, is alive or animate when we can hear it.
Hence, our reading would mean the stifling of the music which itself is symbolic of the "people".
Although there are many techniques which create ambiguity through deviation, there are also many cohesive devices which hold these poems together.
Both poems use sound patterning through alliteration extensively and to great effect.
In lines 7-13 of "New World A-Comin'" the use of alliteration and sibilance is mimetic of the "silence" in line 11.
The repetition of the unvoiced fricative /f/ and unvoiced sibilant /s/ also slow down the rhythm of the text which is broken at the end of line 11 through the use of enjambment.
This is another example of foregrounding by graphological deviation; the use of the colon adds to this sense of "silence".
In verse two of the poem, the repetition of the fricative /f/ works in a very different way.
The way in which the air flow is not stopped in this alliterative passage gives it a sense of heightened action, which is echoed by semantic links between the words; "fire-arms", "fire", "flashed" and "flame" all have collocations of violence and even war, which is further emphasised by the reference to "warriors".
In "Pan Recipe" Agard also uses alliteration extensively which generates a sense of rhythm.
This in turn is mimetic of the dramatic language.
The repetition of bilabial plosives in both lines three and five emphasise the "pain" Agard is trying to convey and echo the brutal acts to which the extended metaphor relates; the alliteration brings out the anger the persona of the poem feels about the cruel treatment of Caribbean people.
This is added to by Agard's use of internal rhyme in lines three and four.
The repetition of the diphthong /ɔi/  draws out these lines and thus emphasises the sense of time suggested earlier in line two "simmer for centuries".
In "New World A-Comin'" the extensive use of parallelism is also a cohesive device which helps us to construct meaning from this largely fragmented work for example in the first four lines.
Furthermore, it could be argued that there is a circular structure, whereby the end of verse three echoes the first verse in tone, mood, and in the semi-repetition of the abstract metaphor drawn between "soiled" and "silence".
The cohesion in "Pan Recipe" stems largely from its genre as performance poetry and the consistent use of ellipsis - for example the ellipsis of the article in line five - and alliterative rhythms which echo Caribbean speech.
Hugh Blair voices an attack on the practices of 18th century poets in his Lectures on Rhetoric and Belles Lettres for the circulation of artificial and lofty pieces among the intellectual classes which detached poetry from the concerns of the everyman.
Blair exposes the harmful effect on works that are motivated by money and reputation rather than using the imagination with an aim to educate, inspire, move, delight and communicate with the reader.
Wordsworth and Coleridge's Lyrical Ballads indicated a revolution in literary history in reaction to the poetry created in the Augustan period, favouring tastefulness, elegance and civility.
Wordsworth and Coleridge experiment with a new way of using language in this volume, eradicating features of 18 th century poets by composing organic, liberated and passionate verses inspired by real people and concerning real life experience.
We Are Seven offers an excellent example of the power of simple and direct language to relate personal emotion and experience that is successful in accessing a wider readership.
Wordsworth emancipates the common man into art by elevating the natural to the supernatural, entirely worthy of his glorification.
Wordsworth favours the ideas of childhood by allowing the thoughts of the naive, inexperienced and innocent little maid to triumph over the narrator's need to affect her young mind with the reality and cynicism of an adult's.
While the narrator strives to educate the young girl, her view of death forces him to revaluate his own comprehension of this concept and, ironically, her insistence eventually succeeds in educating him.
Wordsworth challenges the reader to consider if a child's incomprehension of death is any different from that of an adult.
The process of death is only as factual as far as a person's heart stops beating and their physical body begins to decay.
Everybody is limited to this scientific knowledge and therefore unable to ascertain what happens to a person when they die, making this an issue of great religious concern.
While the adult attempts to correct the child, Wordsworth highlights that 'we are seven' is a statement which cannot be corrected as, in the absence of an absolute truth, the child has the freedom to believe whatever she chooses.
Wordsworth's imitation of a child is entirely convincing throughout this work by his application of simple diction that avoids any decoration including modifiers, figurative devices, and abstract nouns.
In addition, the child's lexis is often limited to monosyllables: This use of basic language is appropriate to voice a child of limited education and experience.
The simplicity of her speech also helps her speak plainly and directly without any ambiguities, projecting an honest, transparent, young mind.
Wordsworth continues to voice the young girl by using a euphemism to describe the death of her sister, Jane.
It is typical of a parent to relate death to a child using a euphemism in order to protect them from the pain and sorrow caused by death.
This phrase avoids any implication of permanence as the use of 'away' is very casual, like a person leaving a room or going on a holiday.
The child certainly does not see death as an indication of the end of a relationship or a person which is a refreshing perception.
The child speaks of death without any fear, sorrow or mystery and treats the loss of her brother in a similarly hopeful way: The child continues to avoid referring to the loss of her siblings as 'death' and, on this occasion, she implies this process is obligatory and her brother's involvement is purely passive.
Rather than demonstrating incomprehension here, the child expresses a very mature attitude by accepting that it was simply her brother's turn to leave.
The infant perceives death as a kind image by describing the moans of her ill sister when 'God released her of her pain' .
She implies that God intervened in her sister's life when the quality of her life diminished by relieving her of her sickness in death.
The child displays very Christian ideas by using God as the figure who decides who should live or die.
Christianity embraces a very positive perception of death in the belief that while it marks an end to life on earth, it creates the beginning of a new life with God in heaven.
It is not at all surprising that Christianity has shaped the hope of this child.
The little maid does not seem to feel at all distanced from her siblings in death.
She appears to enjoy regular visits to the graveyard where she sings to them, eats with them and plays around their graves.
Death has not prevented her from keeping them company and they are still a comforting presence to her.
The child is unfazed by being the only active figure in their ongoing relationship: Wordsworth has manipulated the natural syntax of these lines by end-focusing the activity of the young girl in order to emphasise her as independently fulfilling the active role while the deceased are merely passive figures.
This stanza opens with three simple clauses which supplement the undecorated diction of the child, lacking the complexity of adverbs and adjectives.
This list of verbs describes day-to-day occupations of the young girl, suggesting that she doesn't distinguish the graveyard from other locations of her day.
Since her family has moved from her home to the graveyard, she has simply extended her surroundings and feels equally comfortable in a setting that can be bleak and upsetting for others.
While she provides company for her siblings, she understands they shall never suffer solitude as their bodies have been buried next to each other: It does not concern the child that her deceased relatives cannot interact with each other or that they are separated by coffins.
Her concerns are straightforward; if their bodies are physically close together they are accompanied in death.
It becomes increasingly difficult not to pity the young child who has experienced so much of death although her age should limit her experience.
Wordsworth uses the seasons to convey the passing of time between the girl's loss of one sibling and then the next.
In one stanza, she enjoys the summer playing around her sister's grave with her brother and in the next she loses that same brother: The seasons are always a cause for excitement to children as the weather allows them to enjoy different outdoor activities but there is a sense that she misses out on these ordinary childhood experiences.
The conditional verb, 'could' suggests there was an opportunity for her to enjoy the new season but this was eradicated by the death of her brother, helping the audience to sympathise with the young girl.
Wordsworth uses an oxymoron by including this piece in his collection of Lyrical Ballads as the lyric poem is conventionally non-narrative, unlike the style of We Are Seven.
Wordsworth freshly interprets the old ballad tradition by retaining the simplicity of the ballad but incorporating a greater depth and complexity in the lyric form that is commonly used to convey an emotion or state of mind.
Wordsworth ironically accompanies the grave subject matter of this poem with a light-hearted tone embroidered in the ballad form.
The poet adopts many conventions of this form including a four-line stanza with a simple abab rhyme scheme and heavy use of dialogue.
Wordsworth uses iambs in tetrameter followed by trimeter and repeats this metre pattern to complete the stanza: At the end of the iambic trimeter, a natural pause is formed before continuing to the second tetrameter that assists the formation of a sing-song, childlike rhythm of a nursery rhyme.
Wordsworth adds to the buoyant, cheerful mood of this poem with internal rhyme on the words, 'green' and 'seen' in this particular stanza.
The flow of the ballad is interrupted in the final verse where Wordsworth extends the stanza into five lines and modifies the rhyme scheme to abccb.
This verse marks a change of speaker to the exasperated adult following a long period of dialogue from the young girl: The adult introduces and bluntly repeats 'dead', exposing a great contrast between these two voices following the child's spirited euphemisms that avoid the grim reality of this description.
Wordsworth's use of punctuation emphasises the adult's frustration that the child insists on referring to life and death as a unified existence.
Wordsworth suggests a level of sophistication and complexity in the mind of the adult that does not pervade the mind of the child by using enjambment for the first time in this poem: By allowing the child the last word, Wordsworth encourages the reader to allow the child's way of thinking to triumph over the adult's.
Wordsworth challenges the reader's perceptions of death in this poem by offering two opposing reactions to this process.
The poet asks if the child's cheerful perception of death is simply attached to the incomprehension of her age or if it is an inspirational and heart-warming attitude that even adults could adopt.
Wordsworth questions if an adult is better prepared for the emotional distress of this experience or if years just develop a more bleak and sorrowful reaction to loss that can never return to a child's beautifully simplistic methods of dealing with adversity.
Born Eric Arthur Blair, the enigmatic figure that most people know as George Orwell is one of the most influential writers to ever provoke and open up the debate between systems of power and the extent to which they maintain or could potentially maintain control and direct influence over its subordinates.
Orwell believed that the most important and effective tool in upholding social order is through the regulation of language.
Two novels that encapsulate the fears of how a totalitarian society can use language as a method of control over the people within it are his two last works, Animal Farm and Nineteen Eighty-Four.
These novels, in which Orwell established his popularity and reputation, provoked divided opinions, radical ideas and cultural unease at a time when many people were filled with anxieties and uncertainties about how authorities would govern their countries after the World War Two.
After the allegorical reflection of Joseph Stalin's tyrannical rule over the Soviet Union which was witnessed in Animal Farm, Orwell further attacked the idea of totalitarian authorities in Nineteen Eighty-Four, by portraying a world just thirty six years into the future where advanced technology gives absolute political authority to those in charge.
Animal Farm's historical relevance gave nineteen Eighty-Four a sense of realism and plausibility, with his aim to convince his readers that a conscious objective approach to the use and especially observation of language was needed to avoid the type of social degradation that was suffered in the Soviet Union under Stalin's reign.
One of the ways in which Orwell articulates the relationship between language and power is through psychological manipulation.
Two incidences in Animal Farm that display the subtle manipulation used by Napoleon, who is the Orwell's characterisation of Stalin, are firstly, where the dogs show that Snowball is not welcome on the farm, and secondly, when Napoleon's propaganda agent, Squealer, delivers one of his many responses to oppositional stances taken to the changing of the farm's original commandments: And The first quote highlights Napoleon's technique of manipulation through creating a negative feeling towards the notion of an 'other', who in this particular scene takes the form of an exiled farm member named 'Snowball'.
Snowball is the novel's interpretation of ex-Soviet Union co-founder Trotski, and is continually blamed throughout the progression of Napoleon's domination of the farm for every thing that goes wrong.
Not only does this prevent the animals from doubting the pigs' abilities, but it also unites the farm against a common enemy, which before the revolution was Jones the owner of the farm but now has taken the form of Snowball.
This manipulation is extended further with the dogs' 'blood-curdling growls' and the display of their 'side teeth'.
The combination of this subliminally anchoring verbal and non-verbal language is an example of control through intimidation.
Snowball's ideas ran contrary to Napoleons, and therefore were seen as a threat to the power structure that the pigs were beginning to form.
The threat of the growls and teeth are not direct, but assist to subtly instil into the minds of the animals the way they should feel towards Snowball.
The second Quotation represents Orwell's implications that the lies of propaganda were essential in Napoleon's rise to power as he goes about breaking each of the seven commandments.
Tyrannies are maintained through the means of lies, persuasion and subtle manipulations of the truth and the constant threat of having 'Jones back' is a cunning way of manipulating the animals into associating the changes that being made to the Commandments with beneficial purposes, even though the less civilized animals do not fully understand the point that Squealer tries to make.
The novel points to a natural human tendency towards class divide, a need for the separation between intellectual and physical workers and whereas Orwell clearly shows how it is achieved on behalf of the capitalist pigs, it is noticeable that not only are the animals in a poor position to be informed otherwise, but are especially gullible and carry out hard work without question most of the time.
The relation between physical labour and naïveté is important because if the animals are drained of energy physically, the pigs soon discover they are more likely to be mentally drained and as such will not make the effort to consciously observe language and therefore oppose any drastic changes to their ideologies basic principles.
They are instead forced to rely on their basic thought processes and their intellectually limited minds are therefore susceptible to unconscious registrations of the associations and meanings Squealer deviously uses in his language.
Another way in which Orwell exhibits the relation between power and language is through the control of information and history.
The following quotation is taken from Nineteen Eighty-Four, as the protagonist of the novel, Winston, contemplates how the control of language can lead to the control of thought: 'Double-think' is the ability to withhold two conflicting pieces of information in your head.
This was a concept that the controlling party in Nineteen Eighty Four took full advantage of by continually feeding its citizens minds with information, either propaganda about current facts and figures, or lies about historical incidents.
Like all modernist writers, Orwell hinted at the booming scientific movement as an extension of the government that was attempting to create a sense of 'reality' in the minds of its population.
Just as the bible explains how things were are now, Orwell wishes to represent how people's perceptions can be shaped and controlled through the perversion and corruption of language by the gradual replacement of historical truths with the party's own fabricated information.
As a person's memory of what really happened in the past is slowly repressed into their unconscious, the subtle implementation of new information passes unnoticed into people's minds so that not only are they oblivious to the exchange of information that has occurred, but they now believe this fresh information to be true, therefore shaping that person's perception of reality, hence Winston's phrase 'Reality control'.
It is an ingenious method of maintaining the status quo and ceasing any thoughts of opposing the party, because a person would only find the state of affairs unacceptable if they had some kind of memory that things had been different at some point in time to compare it with.
'Newspeak' was a concept that Orwell invented as a further warning to his readers that if they did not have control of what they say, they will not have control of what they think.
The depletion of multiple meanings in words would lead to a reduction in the range of conscious thought once used to think of such meanings until there will be no way to express opposition to the party because the concept of it, let alone the meaning, will be eradicated from the memory.
From the concepts of control described above, it is possible to see another system of control that the party establishes in Nineteen Eighty-Four: the idealisms of conformity and orthodoxy through the consistent monitoring of people's language.
The way that totalitarian regimes accomplish a state of orthodoxy in their people, at least the citizens of Nineteen Eighty-Four, is to create a feeling of disdain towards those that whose use of language is unorthodox in comparison everyone else.
The following quotation, which is taken from Winston's conscious 'unorthodox' thoughts, describe the ways in which the party is extending its reign of power by teaching children to detect unorthodox language use in adults: The tyrannical party's use of 'junior spies' to monitor adults language is a necessary extension of their power for them because, until newspeak is completed in the year two thousand and fifty, there is still a potential for unorthodox language use which may express opposition to the party as previously suggested in Animal Farm.
Also similar to Animal Farm is the use of psychological manipulation through the use of 'double-think', as people who are already under surveillance from numerous 'telescreens' and hidden microphones, and now even have to be 'frightened of their own children', would be forced to keep their unorthodox thoughts constantly suppressed from their conscious minds should they be tempted to speak out against, and be heard by the party or its extended observers.
Yet what is striking about the way that the party moulds its citizens into instruments of its power is the manner of how it is achieved, and its blatant disregard for human compassion.
The above quotation highlights this method as an example of a cruel, deceitful and sadly inventive conduct of human lives; the party has raised its inhabitants to posses an unquestioned and focused hatred on everything different from what they know as normal.
'Foreigners' are looked upon in the same manner as 'thought criminals' because they all pose the same threat to, not the children themselves, but the party.
They all carry the risk of disrupting the status quo of which the party has built its ideals around.
The party requires certain level of hatred towards 'others' so that it can release the emotion and passion that every human being possesses in a manner that benefits the party.
It needs to release this emotion to keep people's emotion and passion released, but focused on external factors, and not internal elements such as the party or its methods.
This, combined with the re-writing of history as mentioned previously, allows the party to run their government as they please without ever being questioned.
The deceitful aspect of this way of treating people is a very simple one, if the party members recognise and have a deep level of understanding of how to corrupt and distort language to the point that they gain absolute and unquestioned power, such as in the method described above, then the members of the party themselves must have a conscious and compassionate level of understanding of human behaviour in order to achieve this.
The cruel fact that they allow the majority of the population to become devoid of any real human emotion to become merely instruments of their power is the point Orwell wishes to express: As the use of language becomes increasingly more intertwined with the uses of modern, totalitarian instruments of control such as technology and science, we as human beings must keep a conscious, objective approach to the use of language to prevent us from becoming slaves to systems of power, devoid of conscious and a sense of objective reality.
Now we have seen how a system of power can use suppressed emotions in an external manner to their benefit, we will now look at how those in command maintain human beings as instruments of control whilst still catering for the other important emotional need, pleasure.
Of course, a system of power would not be so compassionate as to waste the time and effort required to do this without putting this to process to beneficial purposes.
One of the ways of achieving this pleasure outlet by using language is the reciting of the poem 'Comrade Napoleon' in Animal Farm, which aims to solidify the conformist behaviour of the animals by attempting to discourage individuality and promoting an advance towards a collective mind state: And The poem 'Comrade Napoleon' is similar to the elements of pleasure outlets on the farm that do not use language such as parades and military awards in that it serves as propaganda.
This is because, firstly, the continual and gradually unconscious reciting of the poem means that the subject matter will eventually strengthen the sense of loyalty that the animals feel towards their ruler, and secondly it will consolidate the mood, atmosphere and general feeling of the farm.
In this way, the pigs have successfully provided a pleasure outlet for the animals whilst concurrently instilling the subject matter in the language used into the minds of the animals as they recite the poem.
This advantages, devious use of language consequently increasing the influence of their power and strengthens the command of the pig's reign.
A key use of the language of songs and poems when they are recited as a whole is the transference of the animal's mental process from internal to external.
The society of the farm, just like the civilization of city life in Nineteen Eighty-Four, increasingly becomes an extension of people's mental life.
The pigs, similar to the party in Nineteen Eighty-Four, seek to achieve a unified sense of self within its subordinates, one that is unconscious and therefore easier for the conscious, intellectual pigs to control and command.
Just as the majority of modernist writers tended to focus on the inner conflicts of their character's mental states, Orwell describes similar processes in terms of external events.
What Orwell suggests in Animal Farm and Nineteen Eight Four is that if language is the principle tool in the evolution of the human mind, language use requires a focused, conscious effort, which the pigs are able achieve.
The other animals, due to their restricted levels of intellectual development, see through the perspective of what a civilized person would refer to as their unconscious mind, the natural, primitive and potentially overwhelming mental state.
Hence, in external terms, if the animals realized that they themselves were being oppressed, they possess the physical potential to overpower the pigs, which is why the pigs use language to control them to such an extent.
Modernist writers continually infer that a unified sense of self is 'unnatural' in a civilised person, a trait that has also been linked to large social formations such as cities and large social groups.
Therefore Orwell's vision seems to indicate that, because of society's processes reflecting that of the human mind, there must be a conscious and dominating force in society that controls the majority of unconscious processes in order for that society to function correctly, and that language, being the key tool of civilization, is the means in which to achieve this control.
Nevertheless, as shown in these two novels that show both humans and animals in power, language is inevitably corrupted by anyone that comes into power in order to suppress the potential overwhelming forces of the lower classes and subordinates.
If most modernist writers consider the search for the internally unified self a myth, with the transition from internal to external processes in mind it seems as though Orwell is pointing towards the notion that the attempt at creating a collective whole from a group of individuals through the use of language is not only corrupt, but also highly unnatural.
Because Orwell tended to focus on political rather than internal conflicts, he was not considered to be a modernist writer in the true sense.
However, the external conflicts of his novels closely reflect theories of the internal conflicts of the human mind that greatly influenced the period in which these novels were written.
In Animal Farm and Nineteen Eighty-Four, Orwell warns his readers that systems of power can and inevitably will use the civilizing tool of language to control the people that they rule over.
The extent to which this is shown in the two novels is not as improbable as it may seem, since already we have seen how systems of power can corrupt language to the point of psychological manipulation, misleading information, prejudice against others and propaganda to make lower orders praise those in control.
These methods of language perversion exist today just as they existed when the novels were written.
Orwell did not write to prophesise the future, his works simply served as a reminder of how language has been put to corrupt use in the past, as was witnessed in Animal Farm, and the possible ways, though in an exaggerated manner, this corruption may occur in the future, as witnessed in Nineteen Eighty-Four.
In both novels, Orwell suggests that every system of power will inevitably abuse the use of language as mechanisms of control, but what is changeable and important is the need for people outside the circle of power to keep conscious, objective approach to the use of language.
If people can accomplish this, systems of power will never have the opportunity to take complete control and command of language and therefore their minds.
Michel Foucault's essay 'What is an Author?'
has had a massive impact upon how people view the idea of authorship and authority.
Foucault claimed that the traditional view of the author was simply a modern construction seeking to exalt the author to an omniscient position.
However, he felt that in reality the author has no authority over their text, as the reader cannot know the author and therefore cannot interpret the author's intentions.
Moreover, he felt it was unnecessary to know the author's intention; what was more important was for the reader to be able to bring their own meaning and interpretation from the text for their own use.
Other Postmodern thinkers have taken this idea further, treating the world as a text and the individuals habiting the world as the readers.
The individual has no clear authority or standards by which to interpret the world and is consequently left to discover 'truth' for themselves, and to live in a way which best serves themselves and their needs.
Sigmund Freud thought that in view of death, the central motivation for the individual in life was the feeling of desire and pleasure.
In addition, Jacques Lacan said that at the core of human identity is a sense of lack, knowledge that we will never be fulfilled, therefore desire is not the product of the search but the point of it; the individual desires desire.
The Modern subject, in light of the death of God and religion, searched for reason and truth, believing they could be found in science, philosophy and in the benevolence of mankind.
The Postmodern individual, unconvinced by the reality of altruistic humanism, became fluid, hybrid and fragmented.
At the heart of Postmodern subjectivity is the need to define oneself against the 'other'; the need to find self fulfilment and realisation.
Modern and Postmodern thought derives from the idea that religion is dead, and in view of human death being the end of life  come the philosophies for the present age.
It is interesting that much of this thought is also taught in the Bible, the book which Postmodern thinkers see as ancient and transient.
The writer of Ecclesiastes claims that life under the sun  is in fact meaningless and impossible to understand.
The pursuit of pleasure brings no satisfaction, we do not know what will happen when we die and yet we feel and desire to live.
The apostle Paul writes to the church in Corinth that if death is the end and there is no resurrection then  "Let us eat and drink for tomorrow we die".
Although both the Biblical writers are arguing that in fact death is not the end, they can see that if it is, then they are in agreement with Freud, Lacan and Foucault that all that is left is instant gratification, desire and self-fulfilment.
The subject must find their identity in a fragmented world.
The exploration of identity through storytelling and the effects of truth upon identity are the themes of continuity that I will look at in Joseph Conrad's modern novella Heart of Darkness  and Alan Warner's contemporary novel Morvern Callar .
Heart of Darkness is Conrad's novella about the journey of a western seaman, Marlow, and his search into Africa for the explorer Kurtz.
Marlow's physical journey is reflective of his psychological journey for truth and meaning that he hopes Kurtz might bring him.
The novella is written from the narrator who is listening to Marlow telling his story to a group of men.
Marlow is portrayed as a thoughtful, insightful, meditative idol .
He is compared to a Buddhist preacher , one who is enlightened and has a voice, able to explain the world to his followers.
However, the narrator fears he will only be expounding one of his "inconclusive experiences"  which would be the result of attempting to understand an "incomprehensible world" .
The white man was viewed as a god-like figure, a civilized being.
Yet when Marlow arrives in Belgium, the western city reminds him of a sepulchre , an image that suggests an outward adornment of beauty and civility, but an inward shallowness and depravity.
Marlow himself is losing confidence in his own understanding and interpretations as he tells how the injustice of exploitative colonialism that he encountered would slowly have an effect on his view of humanity.
"For a time I would feel that I belonged still to a world of straightforward facts; but the feeling would not last long."
He has given up hope of finding any meaning in the west, cautious of the noble idea of the civilizing mission and sceptical of his aunt's view of him as an apostolic "emissary of light" .
Conrad describes Marlow's journey as one into hell, as the women in the waiting room to see the doctor guard "the door of darkness" .
He is aware of the dangers of the psychological impact of his journey, he feels he is becoming "scientifically interesting"  and he had been warned before by the doctor that "the changes take place inside" .
Marlow struggles to narrate his story, despairing at his "impossible"  task, unable to become more than a silent voice in the pitch dark.
Marlow realises his need to find understanding and although he recognises his own limitations of expression, he believes that he can find this wisdom in Kurtz.
Kurtz is portrayed as an enigmatic god-like figure, the man who has become an idol for the local peoples and an inspiration for all those who hear of him.
Marlow's greatest fear is that he will "Never hear him" .
He has not been thinking about meeting or seeing him, but hearing him.
For Kurtz has, The image of Kurtz here is of a deity; he has a voice, which the Bible describes is the method  by which God effects his power in creation, revelation and bringing life.
Kurtz is being specifically compared here to Jesus; he has a voice that Marlow believes is able to enlighten the darkness of the world.
As Marlow does not have the expression that brings understanding, it becomes his destiny, or pilgrimage, to hear Kurtz.
The Russian, who Marlow meets before he encounters Kurtz, tells him that "You don't talk with that man - you listen to him" .
Although he claims that Kurtz has indeed "enlarged my mind"  there is a hint that the result of hearing him has indeed left him still without hope or understanding.
'He waved his arm, and in the twinkling of an eye was in the uttermost depths of despondency' .
This phrase is a biblical reference to the final triumph of the resurrection, the moment when all hope and joy in life is fulfilled but Conrad associates it with an epiphany of despair, a fall to utter hopelessness.
Marlow continues to have faith in his meeting with Kurtz, but as his journey evolves and he finds out more about his methods he becomes increasingly distressed and antipathetic towards him.
The anti-climax that the Russian's despondency predicts comes true in Kurtz's final revelation before he dies.
As he lies in the despair of darkness, he experiences a "supreme moment of complete knowledge" , his last words, the hope that Marlow has, are "The Horror!
The Horror!"
The god-figure is dead, the voice is gone and his revelation is ambiguous and at best a bleak summary of the world that he has left behind.
The discovery that their shared fate is simply oblivion is the "appalling face of glimpsed truth"  that Marlow discovers which maligns his belief in humanity and mankind.
The loss of the voice, the narrator and the author at the end of Heart of Darkness destabilises the framework of Marlow's mind and his outlook on society.
When he returns to Europe he views people's lives as meaningless, filled with "insignificant and silly dreams" .
Foucault predicts this effect when he sees the death of the author.
The loss of the central and authoritative figure creates disharmony and instability leaving the reader with no answers and no centre.
The centre or the 'heart' is no longer knowable, but in fact filled with darkness.
When there is no longer the god-like figure, the self becomes fragmented and unsure of anything, death is the only common fate and life must be understood subjectively.
At the end of the novella we see that in effect, Marlow has been searching for something that was not actually there.
Lacan's theory is relevant here because although the point of his search is intangible, he would say that he has been searching for desire.
He is fulfilled in the sense that although from the beginning an answer was never there, in his journey he has desired it, and filled his sense of lack.
Alan Warner's existential novel  Morvern Callar begins when the main protagonist Morvern finds her boyfriend having committed suicide and examines the issues of the morality of her reaction in a seemingly valueless and hedonistic society.
The novel begins where Heart of Darkness finishes; with the death of the author, the creator and God.
Morvern's boyfriend remains nameless but is referred to with the divine capital "Him" .
He is the author who has written a novel which he leaves with Morvern and he is the creator of the model village of their town which is in the loft of their apartment, where his divine body lies.
The reader never hears his voice; his life and death are left in Morvern's hands, and he becomes her story.
Morvern is an orphan, unaware of her biological parents and born into a vacuum, with no grounding, stability or history.
She keeps her boyfriend's death a secret and then claims authorship of his work.
Throughout the novel, there is a clear emphasis on the narrative voice; in the Mantrap, Lanna and Tequila Shiela recall their ex-boyfriend stories, at the Kale Onion Hotel the main event is Panatine's 'finger' story and Couris Jean is keen to reminisce with Morvern about her arrival at the port.
All the characters exist and find their identity in storytelling, a discourse which gives them order, meaning and coherence in the midst of an unstable confused world.
The god-like figure is dead and consequently people have a sense of lack and desire for it to be filled.
The story with its notion of order replaces God and the peace and stability found in the godhead.
The narrative voice is what the characters strive for, which is why Morvern is so keen to hear what Couris Jean had said before she died, and why it is so tragic that she dies speaking an incomprehensible language.
Towards the end of the novel as Morvern becomes increasingly isolated, the storytelling diminishes and all Morvern can hear is the "silentness" .
Foucault argues that because the author is dead then the individual must interpret the world subjectively.
The individual becomes inward and self-interested.
This is demonstrated clearly through the narrative by Morvern's meticulous description and fascination of her physicality.
The sensuous narrative continually describes Morvern washing, doing her nails, going to the toilet, applying her lipstick and shaving her legs.
Her inward-looking fascination with herself and her body reaches the extent that she feels separate from it; when she has sex she says "I let them do anything to me and tried to make each as satisfied as I could" .
The emphasis here during such a physically binding passionate act, is the disconnection of her body from her mind and the base instinct of self and not mutual gratification.
Morvern's world is the youth culture of sex, drugs and alcohol.
Her music is central to her identity; guiding and encapsulating her.
The 'Utopian Experience'  of the club scene is another escape from reality, a "huge journey in that darkness"  where the music takes over and "You didn't really have your body as your own" .
She searches for experience by using up her boyfriend's money  and enjoys all the pleasures of the hot island sunbathing, drinking and clubbing youth-culture, not even wishing to sleep in order that she can "know every minute of that happiness" .
The fragmented, blurred and illusory identities of the characters in the novel are signified by the use of nicknames.
The individuals create and re-create their subjective identity through a process of deferral from reality.
The alienated self must find definition through different 'others'.
Another example is the individual as consumer; Morvern is closely connected with her favourite drink Southern Comfort, her Silk Cut brand of cigarettes and her gold lighter.
Her constant cycle of re-identification is portrayed by her evolution from Silk Cut onto Regals, then Sobranie and then by the end she has given up smoking.
The most explicit image of the fragmented self is Morvern's boyfriend's body being cut up and spread all across the land.
The cycle of the characters' lives revolve around their meaningless jobs and their nights out, with set venues and structures to their entertainment.
The definition that Trevor gives to describe his group of friends is simply "We drink" .
Red Hannah laments the "the world we've made" suggesting that despite the seemingly endless opportunities of self-fulfilment "There is no freedom, no liberty; there's just money" as he bemoans his "wasted life" .
I would like to suggest that Morvern Callar demonstrates the implications of Foucault's theory and the world that is created in the wake of it.
When there is no author or God, there is no objectivity, moral standards, and truth.
One of Morvern's most questionable actions is when, after keeping her boyfriend's suicide a secret, she cuts up his body and distributes it over the countryside.
The narrative during her exercise portrays her as a naïve, innocent and playful youth.
The narrator gives no moral judgement; she is a child performing what many might see to be a transgressive act, but as though she were playing a game or carrying out a banal task.
Without responsibility to an objective moral standard the individual is left to judge moral actions on conscience alone and the more standards are suppressed the fewer there are and the less immanent one's conscience is.
In a society where there are no rules, her actions are justifiable.
Even her claimed ownership of the novel is an attempt to find an identity, an attempt of self fulfilment which the Postmodern thinker presumably must applaud.
Warner's lack of moral criticism opens up the question of whether or not Morvern has any choice in the way she acts.
What happens to morality and ethics when there is no centre?
How does one identify oneself when there is no one to be accountable to?
It could be argued that the society created, and therefore Morvern, is simply amoral, rendering her innocent, blameless and unaware of any harmful consequences of her actions.
However, I would argue that our individual consciences would point us to the distinction between right and wrong.
If someone were to sadistically rape, beat and cut up a young child, then it would take great courage  for an individual to claim no objective wrongdoing.
Our objective ability to see a clear wrong action indicates an objective moral standard that is not controlled by the individual or the state.
I grant that perception and recognition of wrong actions may become increasingly unknowable, as in Morvern's case, but I think that is a self inflicted state to begin with, as one persistently disregards one's conscience.
Morvern may well be a product of her society, but that does not render her or her society innocent.
It is no great intellectual or practical attribute of any individual or society to confuse morality with immorality, or to confuse right with wrong.
Foucault is correct that one cannot know dogmatically the intentions, the circumstances and the thoughts of an author.
However, there is a difference between exhaustive and correct knowledge.
The reader's inaptitude to know the whole context does not mean they cannot know some of it.
Enough evidence can lead to a correct conclusion, without having perfect proof.
As human beings, we may not share all circumstances together, but it is not a fair conclusion to say that we have nothing in common, as we are equally human.
Foucault makes an illogical assumption that because meaning and interpretation will be open to some question, it is impossible to communicate any meaning faithfully.
In effect, if Foucault's theory were true, then we would not be able to read his own essay and understand it so coherently.
Foucault leaves the individual as a helpless, alienated and incommunicative being.
However, one does not need to look too far to see communication everywhere, whether by translation, signs or systems; not perfectly, but successfully.
In conclusion, I have argued that Heart of Darkness represents the modern journey to Foucault's argument that the objective authorial figure is dead, and Morvern Callar illustrates the outworking of the theory.
The Modern subject fails in their search to find order and stability in the world and is left darkly disillusioned and empty.
The Postmodern subject seeks to fulfil the 'self' in a desperate conquest to find meaning and identity, a search that has become helplessly subjective.
The individual, if Foucault is right, is left to act alone in a bleak world that has become incommunicative, de-stabilised and seemingly meaningless, despite their inner need for communication, order and morality.
A key factor of the presentation of the narrative voice is 'how writers and readers imagine each other- the difficult balance of identification and differentiation involved in the process of communication or understanding."
Thus the narrative voice is crucial to the art of communication with the reader.
Another role that the narrative plays is to strengthen the structural boundaries of a piece of writing.
In the hope of illustrating these points, I have chosen to look at Part II of Coleridge's The Rime of the Ancient Mariner in order to illustrate the role of narrative in relation to the audience, and Chapter 41 of Jane Austen's Emma, in terms of narrative as relates to structure.
The 'growth of scientific attitudes in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries' meant that poets were no longer 'society's bardic representative, giving back to his fellows a heightened version of their own beliefs and aspirations,' as had been the case for centuries.
Whilst previously the tradition of the Ballad form- short, relatively simple poetic structures dealing with everyday or commonplace occurrences - had to a large extent sufficed, now poets were increasingly 'interested in certain aspects of human behaviour which eluded control by the rational powers."
Romanticism grew into a new genre and focused on the theme of Nature, 'particularly those aspects...which transcended or escaped the ordered patternings of mathematical form.'
The Ancient Mariner is a perfect example of this, as Coleridge himself described it as 'a poem of pure imagination.'
The study of Boehme's work led Coleridge to the idea that 'there existed in the universe a threefold correspondence between nature, the human heart, and the divine."
In The Ancient Mariner, nature plays a key role in the unfolding of the events, as can be seen in Part II with Coleridge's frequent references: 'Sun,' 'sea,' 'mist,' 'wind,' 'breeze,' 'fog,' and 'sky."
Similarly, the 'Human Heart' significant, as can be seen in the Ancient Mariner's own crippling guilt and the reaction of the shipmates, who 'would fain throw the whole guilt' on him.
The 'Divine' is perhaps the most significant of all, leading some, including J.
Beer, to argue that the sun in The Ancient Mariner can be seen to represent God;  it is certainly true that the Sun is linked to the Divine in Coleridge's own words: Similarly, it is this 'Sun' which appears with every change in the ship's fortunes throughout Part II: both good weather and bad is issued in by the rising of the sun, and as things grow hard on the ship, the sun goes from 'glorious' in line 96 to 'bloody' in line 110, showing the punishing nature of this 'divine' sun.
The pace of the narrative changes dramatically with the changing fortunes of those on the ship.
With the opening of stanzas one and two, the narrative is fast paced, created by the use of predominantly monosyllabic words.
As the ship enters the Pacific Ocean, repeated alliteration and uplifting words such as 'flew' and 'burst' generate the image of the ship racing through the waves.
However, with the sudden 'becalming' of the ship comes a different sound to the narrative altogether; slow assonance in 'The bloody Sun, at noon,' the repetition of 'dropt,' and the infertile rhyme of 'speak' and 'break' create a sense of lethargy that echoes that of the shipmates.
This use of repetition continues through stanzas eight and nine, reinforcing this feeling of lassitude and weariness until the first mention of the supernatural in the poem, with the 'slimy things...upon the slimy sea."
J.
Beer refers to The Ancient Mariner as 'a poem on delirium, confounding its own dream scenery with external things,' and this delirium can be seen in the Mariner's increasingly delirious visions of 'death fires' and green burning water.
Coleridge was known to hold 'contempt for the reading public."
Indeed the 'consistency with which Coleridge denounced the reading public has lead Paul Hamilton to conclude that he was incapable of a generous engagement with his audience."
This contempt can be seen in the repeated and stressed morality of the poem.
'The implied philosophy of The Ancient Mariner [is that] men act evilly because they don't know what they're doing."
It is this ignorance that Coleridge criticised in the novel-reading public: Therefore it can be argued that Coleridge found it difficult to connect with his audience, and thus used his narrative form to instruct and condemn.
In Emma, on the other hand, Austen is not known to have any such contempt for her audience, which can be said to be the ambitious middle classes.
Instead, the purpose of Austen's novels is to delight her reader with subtle use of humour, irony and satire, all of which can be seen in chapter 41.
That is not to say that she does not have a strict moral code, as R. Williams argues: 'what happens in Emma... Is the development of and everyday, uncompromising morality which is in the end separable from its social basis."
This 'domestic and moralising fiction which is highly patterned' is particularly visible in chapter 41 in which the word game played by the characters is a direct instruction from Austen to the reader on how to read her novel and in particular this scene.
The first word to be discovered in the Charades scene is the word 'blunder' which obviously and superficially relates to Frank Churchill's blunder by almost revealing his and Jane Fairfax's correspondence.
However, it is a theme central to the plot: Emma blunders with Harriet's feelings, and when she insults Miss Bates.
Mr Elton blunders in his proposal to Emma, and Harriet blunders in her feelings for Mr. Knightly.
Therefore we can see that this scene is highly structured, with Austen using the game to heighten the irony.
It is also interesting to note the positions of the characters as they engage in the game: Emma and Frank, the liveliest characters in the novel, are the protagonists in producing the game: 'no one seemed so much disposed to employ as their two selves."
Miss Fairfax is drawn in almost against her wishes, and Mr Knightly is 'so placed as to see them all."
This can be said to be representative of their characters and behaviour throughout the plot- Emma and Frank being enthusiastic, Jane quiet, and Mr Knightly overseeing the whole affair.
'The responses of the characters to each other are orchestrated in conversations which combine incongruity and complexity of feeling with the greatest possible clarity."
This careful structuring of the narrative- using the character's voices to further the plot- is one of Austen's strengths in Emma.
She 'promotes intimacy between her readers and characters by creating characters who are intimate with each other and whose speech reflects this intimacy."
The novel is 'outstandingly face-to-face;' rather than the bold supernatural of Coleridge's work, 'its crises, physically and spiritually, are in just these terms: a look, a gesture, a stare, a confrontation.'
This scene in Emma is deeply significant to the narrative of the novel, as many truths are revealed within it, and it is representative in style of the novel as a whole.
In this excerpt we are given the first real hint of Frank and Jane's attachment with his blunder over the carriage.
We are also shown Austen's irony at its best as Mr. Knightly and Emma discuss Frank and Jane's relationship, with Emma insisting that Mr. Knightly, the more sensible of the two, has made the idea of an attachment up.
'There is no admiration between them, I do assure you."
Two of the silliest characters in the novel, Miss Bates and Mr. Woodhouse are also present in this scene, and are vital for Austen's development of the narrative.
These foolish characters 'flatter the reader' by including one in the joke of poking fun at them, and are used critically to highlight the intelligence of other key characters, specifically Emma and Mr. Knightly.
All these elements can be seen in this chapter of Emma, and it is this set of guidelines which 'give tension to her art.'
Therefore it is clear that the differences in the way poems and novels organize their stories lies mainly in the narrative structures.
Whilst both Coleridge and Austen use dialogue to further their plots, the wider scope of the novel allows Austen greater use of the tools of irony and satire, whilst Coleridge's work relies much more on the supernatural.
Both works are deeply psychological, with Coleridge's emphasis on the damaged psyche with the Ancient mariner, and Austen's on the psychology of everyday life.
'She provided the emphasis which only had to be taken...into a different social experience to become not a moral but a social criticism.'
In this opening quotation Edward Said highlights a sensitive and intimate topic of Romantic Literature.
British writers and poets of the genre faced personal, political and social moral dilemma on how best to portray the intensely personal yet estranged issue of slavery in the colonies.
Said, in his book Culture and Imperialism, highlights the implications of such an impasse.
Many writers, including Austen, used "striking but careful strategies...positive ideas of home, of a nation and its language, of proper order, good behaviour and moral values.
But positive ideas of this sort do more than validate 'our' world; they also tend to devalue other worlds."
Similarly, texts written by ex slaves also encountered difficulties on how to portray their experiences of slavery.
Whether the purpose of a text was abolitionist propaganda or personal catharsis, an ex slave had to safeguard against offending a reader's sensibilities, whilst also pushing the boundaries on descriptions of slavery, so readers did not become complacent and continued to argue in favour of abolition.
These tensions established a fine balance between the sublimation and disruption of slavery in Romantic texts.
This resulted in slavery finding expression either in abstract images or being banished to the epistemological petticoats of an authors work.
I will examine the works of Jane Austen and Olaudah Equiano for evidence of the sublimation of slavery and I will also explore slavery's ability to disrupt, within the texts.
The introductory quotation taken from Edward Said's book Culture and Imperialism, in which he dedicates a whole chapter to the discussion of Austen's Mansfield Park, targets an intriguing trope of the novel.
Indeed, although Austen only refers to Antigua six times it creates an undercurrent of emotion that pervades the rest of the novel.
The British were extremely active in the Caribbean in Austen's time, yet she seems only vaguely aware of the details of these activities.
Many British writers, including their readers, were probably familiar and therefore comfortable with class distinctions within a domestic sphere.
However, the class distinctions within slavery were international, dislocated and as a result alien and unintelligible to the British public.
Therefore, Sir Thomas's trip to Antigua has a definite function in Mansfield Park because although it is only "referred to in passing, is absolutely crucial to the action- what are we to make of the interpretation...for she might have done something different to establish Sir Thomas's wealth.
"These exerts are vital according to Said, who feels it is "precisely because Austen is so summary in one context, so provocatively rich in the other, precisely because of that imbalance we are able to move in on the novel, reveal and accentuate the interdependence scarcely mentioned on its brilliant pages."
Director Patricia Rozema's 1999 production of Mansfield Park highlights this interdependence by foregrounding the issue of slavery in comparison with the novel.
In contrast with Austen's decision to sublimate slavery, Rozema chooses to portray slavery as a silent yet disruptive force.
On her journey to Mansfield Park Fanny Price looks out onto sheltered cove on the coast to see a slave ship arriving, it is still present when Sir Thomas sends Fanny home to Portsmouth after refusing Henry Crawford's proposal.
This imposing image is an ever-present symbol of slavery threatening to invade and disrupt British values and order.
Rozema also creates an extra scene, involving Fanny's discovery of a book, belonging to the feverish Tom, which contains charcoal sketches depicting scenes of torture, rape and murder in Sir Thomas's plantations in Antigua.
Sir Thomas walks in minutes after her discovery and is forced to confront the collision of these two worlds.
The book disrupts the social and moral barrier Sir Thomas has erected to protect both himself and Mansfield Park.
Indeed this incompatibility is emphasised briefly in the novel when Fanny Price relates to Edmund that after enquiring about the slave trade to Sir Thomas 'there was such a dead silence,' that, in Said's opinion, this suggests "that one world could not be connected with the other since there is simply no common language for both."
Returning to the novel it is clear that whilst slavery in the West Indies is sublimated, Fanny Price's status as an enslaved figure at Mansfield Park acts as a disruptive influence.
Sir Thomas immediately establishes Fanny's lowly status by making it clear among his daughters that 'they cannot be equals.'
He urges the family to prepare themselves 'for gross ignorance, some meanness of opinions and very distressing vulgarity of manner,' attributes which have been commonly associated with savages in the past.
Her elder cousin Tom often requests her 'services.'
However, Sir Thomas's opinions of Fanny change dramatically after his return from Antigua.
His appreciation of her 'improved complexion' and 'figure' are reminiscent of an appraisal of a slave being bought at market.
Indeed, in the film, Fanny views her coming out ball as the equivalent to a slave market, attesting she does not 'want to be sold off as one of my uncles slaves.'
It seems Fanny is acutely aware of her uncle's mastery over her, depicted when her brother William leaves Mansfield Park and Sir Thomas advises Fanny to go to bed, Austen writes " advise" was his word, but it was the advice of absolute power.'
Sir Thomas is often portrayed as a stern master when at home.
Austen clearly states " he was master at Mansfield Park' obtaining compliance 'from submission.'
He is opposed to the feminist liberal opinions, reminiscent of Mary Wollstonecraft, which Austen promotes.
Instead believing a woman should 'adopt the opinions of the man she loved and respected.'
Maria and Julia are perhaps more enslaved that Fanny.
They are bound by tradition to marry.
Mary Crawford teases that these marriages resemble 'sacrifices to the gods.'
Such imagery is reminiscent of fabled savage rituals.
Austen highlights that for Maria, at the age of twenty-two, marriage becomes a 'rule of moral obligation, her evident duty to marry.'
To emphasise this impasse, Austen includes an exert from Laurence Sterne's A Sentimental Journey through France and Italy1768.
Sterne was renowned for his support of the abolitionist movement.
Left alone together in 'the wilderness' of the park at Sotherton, Maria employs an abstract image from Sterne using the cries of a caged starling,' I cannot get out'* in appeal to Henry Crawford of her entrapment to Mr Rushworth and imprisonment at Sotherton.
Kathryn Sutherland concurs that the image is "emblematic" of Maria's own situation.
Austen embellishes a sense of pathos in the reader with Rushworth's comment 'I declare when I got back to Sotherton yesterday, it look like a prison - quite a dismal old prison.'
Edmund too is portrayed as a slave to religion through his father's wishes for him to become a clergyman.
He must deny his feelings for Fanny.
His position is reminiscent of the amanuensis of Gronniosaw who, it seems, is forced to deny his blackness in favour of religion, when he is delivered from 'regions of the grossest Darkness and Ignorance' into 'the Light of his Truth."
In both texts religion is portrayed as enslaving.
Gronniosaw is told off by an old black man for swearing in case 'a wicked man call'd the Devil' would 'put them in the fire, and burn them.'
The novel also demonstrates why slavery was so disruptive among the families whose existence depended on the income from their plantations.
The Bertram's own new money and therefore the tensions of balancing domestic affairs and the international slave colonies were recent encounters and perhaps more fragile to the potential disruptiveness of slavery in the West Indies.
Indeed the colonies depended on the procreation of slave masters with slave women to create a new workforce.
Back in England blood relations no longer "assure continuity, hierarchy, authority."
Indeed Said feels "Sir Thomas's infrequent trips to Antigua as an absentee plantation owner reflect the diminishment of his class's power."
Similarly, the West Indies is sublimated as Sir Thomas is portrayed only as absent from Mansfield Park, but never seen as present in Antigua, suggesting in Said's opinion "the complete subordination of colony to metropolis."
The hypocrisy is inescapable; the wealth of Sir Thomas's estate, which is built on the labours of a slave workforce, is entirely hidden from view and denied existence.
Just as the West Indies in Mansfield Park is denied existence, so too does Olaudah Equiano, in The Interesting Narrative and Other Writings, often try to sublimate his blackness.
Mutiple tropes and genres are layered on top of each other to create an impenetrable mesh of truth and fiction. "
Spiritual autobiography, captivity narrative, travel book, adventure tale, narrative of slavery, economic treatise, apologia and perhaps historical fiction" Equiano's Narrative combines multiple genres, which compliment the double consciousness and dual identity he establishes from the beginning.
Hairdresser, slave, Anglican, briefly a captain and propagandist, Equiano has many identities, perhaps due to a lack of his own identity as a slave.
He never presents a united identity in the text and it is this radical value of indeterminacy that adds value to the question of Equiano's sublimation or acceptance of his black self.
The ease with which Equiano creates these multiple personas, in a "carnivalesque"  display of self-fashioning, demonstrates how easy it is to write and assume identities, showing that culture is only a veneer.
There are particular periods throughout the bildungsroman, which highlight his struggle between sublimation or acceptance of his black persona.
The portrait used as the front piece to the novel establishes this ambiguity between Equiano's black self, Olaudah Equiano and his assumed white identity, Gustava Vassa.
He employs both names on the title page, creating immediate confusion as to his true identify.
Equiano appears dressed in gentleman's attire and reading Acts from the bible to highlight his literacy and Christianity.
However, this serves to embellish his blackness, which is striking and undeniable.
Vincent Carretta states, "calling attention to one's loyalty to Britain was conventional in the works by almost all afro-British writers"  evident in Sancho's Letters of the Late Ignatius Sancho, an African when he claims 'your country, which as a resident I love."
However, "none of his predecessors asserts his identity as a Briton more fully that the way Equiano represents himself in his Narrative. "
In Chapter four Equiano relates that 'I soon grew a stranger to terror of every kind, and was in that respect, at least, almost an Englishman' and later adds ' I now not only felt myself quite easy with these new countrymen, but relished their society and manners...and therefore I had the stronger desire to resemble them, to imbibe their spirit, and imitate their manners; I therefore embraced every occasion of improvement.'
Although African by birth, he chooses to be British by acculturation.
The incident where Equiano encounters a black boy indicates "that Equiano is not fully comfortable in his position on the border between African and European identities."
Many critics, especially Carretta, feel the black boy his 'own size' is in effect his own mirror image, which he first denies but later embraces as his African persona.
A similar period of tension occurs on his meeting with the Prince of the Musquito Indians.
The Prince asks ' how comes it that all the white men on board, who can read and write...and know all things, yet swear, lie and get drunk, only excepting yourself?'
The prince's observations place Equiano as morally superior to the whites, dislocating him from his assumed white identity.
In comparison, Matthew Lewis in his Journal of a West India Proprietor is dislocated from British values and relocated within the West Indies.
By situating himself as an outsider he can perhaps relate to being 'othered' as the blacks were in Britain.
On the other hand, there are also a few passages in the Narrative where Equiano is not reluctant to affront his white audience.
He must have been aware that his inclusion of his marriage to a white woman, Susanna Cullen, would appal racist readers.
Equiano also employs Shakespeare when using Othello's soliloquy;' Speak of me as I am, nothing extenuate, nor set down aught in malice."
By using Othello's words, Equiano assumes Othello's Moorish black identity.
Vincent Carretta recently suggested, "that the author of The Interesting Narrative invented an African identity rather than reclaimed one."
His arguments contest the authenticity of Equiano's narrative.
The suggestion that the text cannot be read as historical fact, disrupts the influential validity of an ex slave experiences, especially a description of the middle passage.
James Olney writes that autobiography has " a special nature as a memorial, creative act" in fact it is " a performance" through which "stories are related not in chronological order but in patterned significance."
Equiano was in truth a writer, who perhaps invented certain aspects of his narrative to create a complete, well rounded novel.
Through this literary tactic Equiano is able to portray slavery as a disruptive force, rather than a subliminal one, had certain evocative images of his African childhood and the middle passage been omitted.
In conclusion, I feel the West Indies subliminal and disruptive capabilities within a Romantic text are still complexly interwoven.
As James Olney highlights "the lives of ex slaves were as much possessed and used by the abolitionists as their actual lives had been by slave holders."
Just as Equiano's, Lewis's, Gronniosaw's and Sancho's lives had been disrupted by slavery in the West Indies, so too were the texts they produced, either themselves through subscription or via amanuenses.
For the authors who were removed from the realities of slavery in the colonies, like Austen, the only option was sublimation.
Her text serves to relate the underlying current of emotions, fear and estrangement, experienced by her society in regard to international affairs.
The two texts I will be examining are, an extract from the poem, The Love Song of Alfred J. Prufrock, by T.S.
Elliot and Her Face by Sir Arthur Gorges.
Both texts share a common theme, love poems dedicated to the narrators muse, yet both are expressed in very different ways.
Through exploring the linguistic, poetic and cultural features, I will examine the comparisons and contrasts that the poems possess.
I will refer to the texts as 'A' and 'B', respectively from now on.
I will begin by comparing phonemes and patterns.
Both texts have comparisons with frequent repetition of alliteration and assonance.
The long and low /l/ sounds of the liquid consonants in text A  provide a smooth fluidity to the poem's sound and flow.
In contrast to this, text B uses fricatives to enhance the staccato effect.
An 'audible friction' is created with the repetition of the aspirate /h/ in the opening line, and with the hissing sibilants in 'so' and 'sweet', a contrast in phonemes is formed between the poems.
Short vowel sounds of the /i/ along with the quickly released /t/ gives the feeling that the word has been broken off quickly or cut short, creating a short sharp abrupt line ending.
Both texts use rhyme, but do so in different ways.
Text A has quite an irregular scheme which appears unsystematic, though lines 2 and 4 rhyme  as do 6 and 8  which adds musicality to the sound patterning.
Text B adopts a lyrical form set out in quatrains.
It begins with an almost Shakespearean rhyme scheme  and this vague frame has repetition with variation in the penultimate stanza.
The structure ABAB is regular and repeated, however again it is rhyme 'A' that is foregrounded as it is constantly used throughout all five stanzas creating a cyclic effect that is continually returning to the beginning.
Visual rhyme is used with 'love' and 'move', however when read aloud the rhyme is not heard.
The two poems have mainly regular stress patterns, but with variations.
Text A begins with a couplet that is an iambic heptameter, although the remainder of the text has an irregular number of syllables and stresses per line, so is free verse.
Three lines start on the reverse foot and so are foregrounded against the regular iambic pattern.
These trochees change the readers pace, acting as a vehicle to carry the text forward.
Text B is a highly regular stressed poem.
Each line contains six syllables and three stresses, and on every occasion but one, these are iambic lines.
The words are all monosyllabic creating a highly structured formal pace.
It also contains a trochee line, which creates disjunction because of the change in rhythm.
This foregrounding is further heightened with the parallelism in word structure; the second word in the couplet remains constant and the first word changes, a reversal of all the other lines.
In text B the use of so much repetition falls into the background and becomes part of the frame of the poem.
When the repetition breaks in the third line, the replacement of 'first' with the adverb 'then', breaks this pattern and is foregrounded.
This break adds kinesis and propels the text forward, leaving the emphasis on the word 'hit', giving weight to the action verb.
The line changes the functions of the same context sensitive personal pronouns.
The possessive pronoun 'mine', changes to the possessive determiner 'my'.
This causes disjunction and produces an effect of broken language, which could be archaic, as it is used in a context that no longer exists.
This shows that the seemingly safe structure of the text is susceptible to change.
Both poems are similar in their lack of similes but inclusion of metaphors.
In text A we meet the inanimate nouns 'fog', and 'smoke'.
Not only do they become physical things with a 'back', but also animate and carries out the action, 'rub'.
This conceit or extended metaphor continues with animalistic connotations, anthropomorphising the 'smoke/ fog'.
It also possesses a 'muzzle' which not only denotes a part of an animal's face, but also something that "Prevents  from expressing their opinions freely" implying that the smoke is smothering and restricting, giving the 'muzzle' a double meaning, making it a pun.
'Its' in the third line is a third person singular pronoun, adding to the creatures substantialism as it has its own possessions, and although the poem implies we can identify 'it', the reader is unaware of what 'it' is in this context.
'Smoke' is not the only personified noun, 'evening' also takes on a life of its own.
Being abstract and not something physical, the rules are broken when it becomes a 'space'.
This shape with corners implies that it is three-dimensional, which takes the reader out of their normal schema and into a parallel world, where the abstract is physical and the inanimate becomes animal.
Text B includes the metaphor, 'doth knit/ mine eye.'
Eye here is recast as something other, the verb 'knit' is not usually coined with the noun 'eye', which creates an unusual collocation and gruesome image.
The sentence structures in the two poems have strong contrasts.
Nevertheless, both are declarative, active sentences that inform the reader, and both contain the definite article, signalling a close proximity and specificity to the subject, which invites the reader into the world of the narrator.
At first glance text A consists of two major sentences that include the main verb, noun head and grammatical subject.
The first two lines are a couplet with a subordinated clause.
By starting in media res, the reader gets a sense of immediacy that is echoed by the ellipses at the beginning of the third line with the omission of 'that'.
Yet the full stop after the couplet acts as a hinge as there is a shift in tense, breaking it away from the rest of the poem.
The present simple tense  shifts to the past perfect, where "it was a soft October night" indicates the past tense.
The second sentence consists of premodifiers that are dependant upon it being 'a soft October night,' making it a subordinated sentence.
Graphologically, the two texts are visually presented very differently.
Text A's appearance on the page means it is immediately recognised as poetry, with capitalisation of initial letters of the first word on every line, and stacked in a block in the middle of the page, whereas Text B can be likened to concrete poetry.
Text A uses caesuras in the form of commas or full stops to avoid enjambment and text B uses physical spaces between words to indicate a break or pause.
Set in a table-like format, comparisons can be made between this and classic oriental scripts which are read from top to bottom, and when done in this way the poem surprisingly still making grammatical sense.
By contrastively analysing these poems, I have explored linguistically, poetically, and culturally the differences and similarities between the two, and highlighted how poems with similar subjects can in fact hold completely contrasting features.
'The first thing to remember about Donne,' writes critic, John Carey, 'is that he was a Catholic; the second that he betrayed his faith."
John Donne was born into a staunch Catholic family in Elizabethan England.
At this time, followers of this religion were sensible to display an outward obedience to the Protestant consensus in order to avoid persecution.
At the accession of James I to the English throne, there was little adjustment to the oppressive, religious framework laid out by Queen Elizabeth in the sixteenth century.
While the pacifistic king offered greater freedoms for Catholics, it was clear that Catholicism in England was becoming an old, dying tradition which suffered a severe decline in numbers with the passing of each decade.
Donne proved to be no exception to the masses who sought to protect their interests by rejecting their socially damaging roots.
Donne's conversion to the Church of England allowed him greater access to employment and connections, which were formerly restricted by his faith, such as his position as Member of Parliament.
It would be unreasonable to suggest that Donne abandoned personal, theological beliefs in his decision to leave the Catholic Church, as his passionate concern with his relationship to God is hardly concealed in his divine poetry.
However, the Holy Sonnets seldom display a man who is entirely convinced by the doctrines he has chosen to follow.
It is possible that the pressures of the Jacobean age framed his decision in converting to Protestantism.
While a member of the Church of England has the freedom to adopt the beliefs of Laudianism, Arminianism or Calvinism among others, N. Tyacke considers Calvinism as 'the theological cement of the Jacobean church'.
There are a number of controversial concepts inherent to this tradition, formulating a far from moderate religion, which is difficult for man to accept.
P.G.
Lake highlights that it is not necessary to maintain that all the English Calvinists 'were indeed convinced Calvinists,' and it appears that Donne is indeed unconvinced.
The Holy Sonnets display the poet's struggle to accept this unforgiving religion, which will not allow man to escape from the heavy burden of original sin and offers little hope in return for reconciliation.
Donne uses the sonnet form to express his frustration, incomprehension, desperation and fears that he associates with the boundaries of Calvinism.
In 1796, John Byrne printed The Articles of Belief, professed by the followers of Calvin, Luther, and Arminius with an aim to dissolve the disagreement among Protestants concerning the five beliefs of their three major doctrines.
Firstly, Byrne writes that the Synod of Dort agrees to the concept of 'divine predestination' where God elects a small number of mankind to be saved, without consideration of their 'faith, or obedience whatsoever,' and commits the remaining masses to 'eternal damnation, without any regard to their infidelity or impenitency'.
Understandably, Donne struggles with this concept because it leaves him helpless, without a guarantee, or even a favourable chance that his consistent devotion will direct him to salvation.
John Calvin admits that this is 'a cumbersome question' which many think 'nothing to be less reasonable,' but Calvin insists on condemning 'the curiousness of man' for questioning the fairness of God.
Discontent with this explanation, Donne seeks comprehension by directing a series of arguments towards God in his Holy Sonnets.
Sonnet IX uses a conversational style to address God directly, and, not dissimilar to others in this sequence, the conversation is one-sided by providing only silence in response from God.
Lawrence Beaston suggests that God's apparent lack of response 'need not be an image of despair' or 'a surrender of doubts about his concern for humankind,' but rather, his absence can be perceived as a method of highlighting the great differences dividing mankind from God's divinity.
While Donne's outspoken nature towards God can be criticised as confident to the level of arrogance at times, he is firmly put in his place as this sonnet develops.
He opens the poem by challenging God with the following argument: In Calvinist terms, Donne has answered his own question in the framework of this interrogative by returning to the fall of man.
Donne refers to Satan as 'the serpents envious' and blames the tree of knowledge for bearing fateful fruit.
Yet the poet has consciously emitted the role of Adam and Eve in this biblical story, who engineered their freewill to succumb to temptation.
Donne perceives freewill as a curse on mankind, which animals and inanimate trees are lucky to have avoided.
He argues that simply being a member of the fallen race staggers his spiritual progress as it 'makes sinnes, else equal, in mee more heinous' .
While these arguments conduct the opening octave of this sonnet, Donne forms the volta at his moment of realisation that he is unworthy to challenge the mystical ways of God: 'But who am I, that dare dispute with thee?'
.
Sentiments of Calvin are echoed here in his belief that it is not fitting 'that man should freely search those things which God hath willed to be hidden,'  as wisdom would be adopted that God does not wish to extend to man.
Within the brevity of the sonnet form, Donne has expressed the identical crave for knowledge that was responsible for the fall of humankind.
He displays man's vulnerability to temptation, which constantly leads him off the path of righteousness.
Byrne published that 'by Adam's fall, his posterity lost their freewill,' so their acts of good or evil are 'predestined by the eternal and effectual secret decree of God' .
This idea implies that man is unable to please its leader because the human race cannot escape from the weight of original sin brought into the world at its creation.
In the first of the Holy Sonnets, Donne expresses his fear that the depths of hell cannot be avoided by mere mortals: Donne can accept that his fallen race is vulnerable to 'our old subtle foe,'  causing sin to pervade every part of one's being, but he struggles to comprehend why God chose to release death into the world as punishment for this fall.
He opens his sequence of divine meditations by challenging the methods of his leader with an interrogative directed towards God: Donne's inability to, in any way, control his path after death creates the fear exposed throughout this sonnet.
Without freewill, he cannot do any evil or good that God will consider in assessing if he is deserved of an afterlife.
The opening octave of this Petrarchan sonnet is weighted with terms that emphasise the pace and unexpected nature of death.
Donne describes it chasing him in 'haste', how it meets him 'fast' and he dares not to move his 'dimme eyes any way'  in fear that he will be struck down at any moment.
However, Donne offers a starkly alternative view of death in Sonnet X of this sequence, where the poet directs insults towards a personified version of this terminating force.
He warns Death against believing the fearful compliments many attach to him that deem him 'mighty and dreadfull' .
The poet lists forces capable of undermining Death, as evidence that this process does not hold supreme control.
He is described as a 'slave to Fate, chance, kings and desperate men'  and Donne argues that this force simply places a person in a rest or sleep, which 'poppie, or charmes'  can also activate.
More importantly, Death's blow is only temporary, unlike the eternity of the soul.
This sentiment is repeated in his sermon preached at the funeral of Sir William Cockayne Knight where Donne comforted his congregation by preaching death's impermanence.
He conveyed that, although the body and soul are physically separated in death, 'they are not divorced; they shall returne to one another againe, in an inseperable re-union in the resurrection'.
This comfortingly peaceful presentation of the afterlife persuades the congregation that God sacrificed himself for the everyman.
This perception rejects Calvinist principles of the elect and provides a hopeful perception, which lies closer to the doctrines of Catholicism or Arminianism in the belief that 'Jesus Christ suffered death for all and everyman'.
The penultimate statement of the Calvinist's Articles of Belief concerns God's persistence in converting those who oppose him.
While God would be expected to elect only the faithful for salvation, Calvinists believe that God saw equal merit in converting hateful and sinful hearts.
Donne describes his heart as 'iron' in the closing line of Sonnet I, conveying that God is indeed able to draw the cold, hard, opposing heart like 'adamant'.
While Donne appears to be a passionately devoted follower to the reader, he is unconvinced of his goodness.
In Sonnet XIV, Donne invites God to inflict physical violence upon him, persuading him that his kind treatment is not enough to repair his sinful ways.
He syndetically lists monosyllabic, dynamic verbs including, 'breake, blowe, burn'  to convey the pain he feels he deserves.
Donne repeats this attitude in Sonnet XI, which he addresses to the Jews who were responsible for the crucifixion of Christ.
He condemns them for crucifying the only one 'who could do no iniquitie', while foolishly passing him by who has 'sinn'd, and sinn'd' and inevitably will do again .
Donne entreats the Jews to show him equal ferocity to that bravely endured by Christ, but the poet suggests that, to 'buffet, and scoffe, scourge, and crucifie'  him would not be a gross injustice but a fair penalty for a man who doesn't fail to crucify Christ daily in thanks for his sacrifice to mankind.
In a sermon preached at St.Pauls in 1626, Donne exposes his reason for desiring the feel the wrath of God: Donne expresses his fear that God will reveal no sign of his anger to his followers until the Last Judgement when he will inflict his wrath upon them in the form of damnation.
Donne expresses these sentiments since his ordination, implying his belief that committing his life to God will not allow him freedom from destruction.
In this expression, Donne develops support of man's total depravity attached to Calvin tradition.
However, there is certainly a hope that pervades Donne's poetry through moments of desperation, despair and frustration.
Donne begs to receive God's violence because he seeks to be repaired, renewed and bent back onto the path that will lead him to eternal life.
The verb, bend, appears frequently in the poetry of Donne, establishing his belief that he can be shaped in the image of God, providing his leader grants him mercy.
This image is conveyed in Good Friday, 1613.
Riding Westward where Donne is 'carryed towards the West' when his 'soules forme bends towards the East' .
A.B Chambers provides this image with an explanation, aided by Donne's own words from his second volume of sermons: This image suggests that the only path to God involves receiving punishment, as man must absolve his sins before he can be invited to eternal life.
Donne's dependency on God, in that he is the only one able to bend the soul of man, draws parallels with Calvinism in the belief that a man who raised up the dead can certainly convert people to his ways.
In the closing sestet of Sonnet XIV, Donne describes his relationship with God in terms of a love affair.
He asks God to understand that he loves him yet is engaged to Satan, who, as described in Sonnet II, is 'loth to lose' him .
It pains him to disappoint and anger God with sin, so he entreats him to either break his attachment with him through 'divorce,' or 'imprison' him so he is deprived of the opportunity to sin again.
He admits he cannot possibly 'breake that knot'  that binds him to God because he is so entirely mesmerised by him.
The only way for Donne to become 'chaste' is to be 'ravished' by God , creating a controversial paradox.
As mankind constantly chases sin, the only way to terminate this endless path is to be overthrown by divinity.
Donne asks to be corrected through affliction and demonstrates the purpose of this by dictating a passage from the book of Hebrews: Donne continues by concisely interpreting this as an indication that 'as his love lasts, he corrects us, and as long as he corrects us, he loves us'.
Donne's dependency on God to defend him in search of a holy path displays the poet's faith in his leader as well as the Calvinist's tendency to play the role of the passive figure in relationship with God.
Donne's expressions of helplessness throughout the Holy Sonnets direct him closer to the doctrines of Calvinism, where man cannot control the desires of God.
Donne's crave for affliction to absolve his sins fits comfortably within this tradition, as does his perception that he is utterly diseased by sin, because Calvinists cannot forgive the total depravity of man.
Indications of hope can be found in his deviation from this religion, indicating Calvinism's punishing nature compared to the softer doctrines of Arminianism and Catholicism.
While he despairs at his subjection, it is possible that he is drawn to this religion because it offers less kindness to man which he believes to be just treatment of the fallen race.
The first low cost airlines appeared at the beginning of the 1990's in the United-States.
The idea was really successful and it quickly spread all over the world.
As the number of these companies grew, prices went down and flying became a cheap and easy way of travel.
But nowadays, no-one can say they have never heard about global warming, which has affected it.
Advertising campaigns spur us on to switch off the lights, not to leave the appliances on standby or to avoid taking our cars.
However, really few of these campaigns regard flying pollution as a major contributor.
Nevertheless, the three articles provide us with frightening information about the effects of flying on the environment.
Given the boom in the number of low-cost companies and the multiplication of the numbers of flights, flying has become a source of worry.
We will in the first part describe what problems are faced by the airline carriers, and we will in the second paragraph see the proposed solutions and discuss them.
Finally, we will try to propose our own solutions and we will conclude.
The problem is really clear and is effectively summed up in the part called 'The facts about flying' in the article published by The Independent: since the gasses emitted at altitude have 2.7 times the environmental impact of those on the ground, flying pollutes much more than any other way of traveling, and proportionally much more for short-distance travels and, even if today the pollution caused by flights is not that important , it could become in the next few years the major source of worries if unchecked given that the number of flights is soaring .
However low cost companies base their business mainly on short-distance flights.
They are thus faced with a dilemma: on the first hand, continue their successful business like that based on short-haul flights or, on the other hand, reduce their business, or even change it totally, in the respect of the environment.
Many solutions are proposed in these articles.
The first one would be simply to reduce the number of flights.
Some propositions are then put forward: to develop public transport and improve car efficiency , increase ticket prices mainly by adding taxes such as carbon-offsetting , nevertheless this argument is contested because it would mean in that case flying would only be for well-offs.
Even if it is not said in those articles, we can not forget that reducing the number of flights would also reduce the number of people who live thanks to the flights, especially all the people of the tourism industry.
Other solutions that would reduce aircraft pollution without directly cutting the number of flights are also proposed: to create CO 2 caps and carbon-trading, to avoid crowded airports in order to avoid planes having to circle wastefully , or to make aircrafts be towed by electric vehicles once on the ground.
However, those solutions do not really look efficient compared with the urgency of the problem.
We have to tackle global warming before it becomes too late, so therefore we have to do something about flying pollution.
There are many solutions proposed in these articles but we also forget the passenger, who is himself directly responsible for the pollution, so why don't we just try to inform him of the consequences of the flights on the environment?
Since that kind of campaign has already been done concerning cars, why not about planes?
But in any case, if nothing is done to prevent global warming, global warming will prevent us from flying.
As the title already indicates, the poem "Not a Nice Place" describes a violent place, probably a whole country, where people live in danger and have to fear for their lives every day.
The mood of chaos and violence in the poem is established with the help of different linguistic features, namely the lexis and word combination, the sound and visual patterning and the structure.
Thus, this essay is going to analyse the poem with respect to the above mentioned features.
The first two lines of the poem "Holy cow!
You should see that place."
make clear right from the beginning that there is a persona directly addressing its audience.
This is be done with the pronoun "you" and as this can be either singular or plural, there may be either one addressee or several.
Thus, although the poem is a monologue, a situation like in a dialogue is established because there is more than one participant.
The main part of the poem then  contains a detailed description of the place hinted to in line 2 and thus refers back to that line.
Here, the persona takes over the role of an observer and informs the addressee of the violence and danger people live in.
Thus, the favoured sentence-type is a stating one and the third person plural is predominant, either as personal pronoun "they"  or in subjects like "children" , "men" , "women"  and "people" .
This shows that everybody, even children, is involved in the conflict.
The last two lines are similar to the first two as they involve a direct address to the audience via a rhetorical question.
By this, a frame is created which underlines the persona´s shock  ) about what he/she sees and which - in contrast to the mainly descriptive main part - displays his/her personal judgement of the events.
Concerning the visual and sound pattern, it is very striking that the poem does not fulfil many of the typical features of its genre poetry.
It is neither subdivided into stanzas, nor is there a particular rhyme scheme.
There is also no regular rhythm or metre.
The only visual aspect that is maintained is that the poem is written in lines.
But unlike other poems, where every line begins with a capital letter, no matter if the line starts in the middle of a sentence, some lines also begin with small letters here.
They are only capitalized if they mark the beginning of a new sentence.
Furthermore, the normal sentence structure of SVO is maintained and there is no deviation from it.
To my mind, all this has the effect that the poem resembles more a dramatic speech spoken to an audience.
This also fits to the findings of the first paragraph, namely that there is a persona  addressing an addressee  to inform and make them think about the miserable conditions the people have to live in.
These terrible conditions are mainly illustrated by the lexis and the combination of words.
The vocabulary is predominantly from the area of war as for example the words "bulletproof" , "war surgeons" , "shot"  and "Uzi sub-machine guns"  show.
By this, an atmosphere of chaos and danger is established.
The use of parallelisms underlines this impression.
In particular the parallelism in lines 12-16 supports the image of violation of law as you can get killed "for your Rolex watch/or your Nike boots/ or if you look crooked at somebody" .
In this parallelism, the reason for getting shot becomes less and less important.
First you are shot for the expensive things you wear -"Rolex" and "Nike" serve as symbols for expensive branches  here - but then even for the way you look at other people.
Thus, the parallelism stresses the senseless- and arbitrariness of the crime.
Another aspect, which is graphically salient because of the inverted commas, is the use of direct speech in line 21.
By foregrounding the "Have a nice day", the people's ignorance and attempt to live a normal life is contrasted to the harsh reality that is described in the rest of the poem.
The sentence has also an ironical connotation as you will never be able to have a nice day in such a surrounding.
Besides the word choice and combination, the phonology of the words also helps to draw a picture of a violent and dangerous place.
Throughout the poem, many plosives - especially the bilabial phoneme /p/ - are used.
As these are very short and aspirated sounds, they sound like single gun shots and thus support the image of war.
A very good example are the "bullet proof back packs"  as - when read aloud - it really seems as if bullets were shot with a machine gun because of the /b/ /p/ /b/ /p/ sequence.
Another example is "could ge t sho t"  where the combination of the plosives /k/ and /t/ with monosyllabic words produces disjoint, machine gun like sounds.
Besides the plosives, the use of the /oi/ and /ei/ diphtongs in "oi vei"  helps to create a sound of deep sorrow to display the persona's grief about the situation.
This is because diphthongs are very long sounds as they glide from one vowel to another and they can be drawn out by a speaker as long as he/she wishes.
Another sound pattern is the alliteration in the title "Not a Nice Place" that is also repeated in line 10.
By foregrounding the "not nice" phonologically, the euphemism of that expression is underlined as the place is not only not nice but rather like hell.
For my rewrite, I have also chosen this line and I will rewrite it from "It is not a nice place" to "Oh, it's such a lovely place."
The reason for this rewriting is that people often, when asked about their home country and if they like it there, answer something similar to the rewrite.
But in this context, such an answer is completely inappropriate as the place described is not a place that anybody would call "lovely".
Thus, with the help of the sharp contrast between this line and the rest of the poem, the addressee realizes the irony of the sentence and its sarcastic connotation.
To my mind, the rewritten line is even more salient than the original one as the use of the word "lovely" creates a greater deviation from the general mood and lexis of the poem than does "not nice".
Because of the ironic connotation, the persona's criticism and attempt to dissociate himself/herself from the described place becomes even clearer.
All in all, the fact that a persona directly addresses the audience like in a dramatic speech has the effect that the poem's content is brought closer to the addressee as they get more involved.
Furthermore, by combining war vocabulary with such phonological effects as described in the essay, the danger and violation of law can be stressed effectively as these are perceived visually as well as audibly.
Thus, each linguistic feature that has been described above contributes to the main topic of the poem, namely to draw a picture of a violent and dangerous place and to criticize the behaviour of the people living there.
Initially these poems may seem similar.
They both explore coming to terms with loss and use poetic language and techniques throughout.
Yet structurally they are extremely different.
Perhaps the most noticeable aspect of this is in terms of form.
'The Kaleidoscope' is in the form of a sonnet, as it consists of fourteen lines mainly in iambic pentameter.
Its structure is closest to that of a Shakespearian sonnet, although the rhyme scheme of the first quatrain  digresses slightly from the standard ABAB.
'The Kaleidoscope' also differs from a traditional sonnet in terms of subject matter; instead of being joyful and celebratory, its subject matter is more sombre.
The terminal couplet of a sonnet has a "usual tendency to summarise or comment on the quatrains, and hence to moralise" .
To an extent this is true here, as the concluding couplet of 'The Kaleidoscope' is more generalised than the rest of the poem.
There is a shift from a largely personal experience , to a more detached and collective statement in line thirteen .
However, unlike the more traditional Shakespearian sonnets, there is a lack of moral resolution.
The poem ends on "not knowing why", which captures the incomprehensible nature of death.
On the other hand, 'Underworld' is written in free verse.
Therefore the reader is not distracted by a rhyme scheme; significant words are emphasised by enjambment and caesura as opposed to end rhyme.
For example there is strong enjambment at the end of the third line; "must I let you go / down alone into each night as winter".
This emphasises 'go', a syllable that is also stressed rhythmically due to the trochaic meter of the second half of the line.
In addition, the phrase 'must I let you go' has a different meaning when separated from the following line, as it implies more finality.
Another prominent instance of enjambment in 'Underworld' occurs between the second and third lines of the second stanza; "to lie still on the ice, to know this is / not for ever...".
In this case, 'not' is emphasised at the beginning of the third line.
It is a key word in this context, because it reinforces the theme of transience that is central to the poem.
In addition, the tension between the syntax and the line break helps to create suspense, similar to that in the fifth and sixth lines of 'The Kaleidoscope'; "Or, turning from the landing, I might find / My presence watched...".
In both cases the reader is urged onwards by a sense of anticipation.
Throughout 'The Kaleidoscope', structure is imposed primarily by end rhyme, metre and sound patterning.
The phrase "my hands become a tray" echoes the "bearing a tray" at the end of the first line.
These lines are similarly constructed, consisting of ten syllables mainly in iambic pentameter.
This technique could be referred to as a scheme, as it increases the regularity of the language and adds structure to the piece.
It implies that the persona of the poem is subconsciously comparing his life before and after his loss.
The second instance is followed by an example of synecdoche; "Offering me, my flesh, my soul, my skin".
The repetition of 'my' replaces the focus on 'you' and 'your'  earlier in the poem.
Here the persona lists specific elements of himself, both physical and spiritual, and together these techniques reinforce that he is all he has left.
Similarly, the sound patterning in 'Underworld' can influence our general understanding and impression of the poem.
Greenlaw uses sibilance in both stanzas, for example "swallowed six pomegranate seeds" in the first stanza and "in something of summer" in the second.
There is also assonance in lines three and four of the first stanza - the sound of 'go' is repeated in 'alone' in the next line.
In addition there is internal rhyme in the fourth line of the second stanza connecting "through" and "you".
Significantly the 'o' sound of 'go' and 'alone' creates a melancholic feel in the first half of the poem.
On the other hand, the 'oo' sounds in the second half and the sibilance are soothing.
This adds to the reassuring tone in the second stanza.
Although there is an absence of end rhyme and regular metre in 'Underworld', the language is linked instead by symbolism and imagery.
The first stanza is an allegory for the Greek myth of Hades and Persephone, illustrated by the title and the reference to "six pomegranate seeds".
It relates to the rest of the poem in terms of the main themes, as these are primarily death  and transience.
In Greek mythology, the underworld is seen as being underground and therefore physically separated from life.
It is often linked to winter, and this is depicted as cold and lonely in the poem, through the mention of 'alone' in line four and the image of a 'freezing' path.
In contrast, summer represents warmth and life in the second stanza, as it thaws the ice.
This contrast between the two seasons is in turn related to the idea of transience, because neither one is permanent.
Finally, the poems are similar thematically in that death is an underlying concern, although there is a difference in the choice of language used.
The phrase "must I let you go / down alone into each night as winter"  in 'Underworld' is reminiscent of Dylan Thomas' 'Do Not Go Gentle into That Good Night', which he wrote during the critical illness of his father.
'Good night' is a common euphemism for death, and probably originated from Shakespeare's 'Hamlet'.
In contrast, Dunn approaches the subject of death in more explicit terms in 'The Kaleidoscope'; "looking in / at where you died."
.
There is strong caesura after 'died', forcing the reader to pause and absorb the impact of this blunt expression.
Using hardened and upfront language is a characteristic of Dunn's poetry, though more apparent in his earlier poems .
Nonetheless, it could be argued that "as if preparing for a holiday" in line four of 'The Kaleidoscope' is a euphemism for dying, as it is a pleasant way of describing someone's departure.
George Moore experienced many problems with the circulating libraries and publishers when seeking to publish his novel Esther Waters.
Some of his earlier works such as A Modern Lover  had been deemed not suitable for family readership due to their lack of "moral proportion" and consequently some of them were banned.
I would like to discuss why Esther Waters in particular was so shocking to its original readers, and what it has to do specifically with its heroine.
I feel it would also be interesting to compare Esther with Hardy's heroine Tess  as similar figures in society, yet who experience contrasting ends.
George Moore  was the son of an Irish landowner and racehorse breeder, and with little early education, he was hardly literate at 16 years old.
After his father died he went to study in Paris and during his time in France he was influenced greatly by the young artists and writers of the time.
He was particularly influenced by the social realist novelists, such as Zola and Balzac, who were interested in the idea of 'telling the truth' and exposing social injustice.
As a novelist, Moore saw his role as writing "contemporary history, an exact and complete reproduction of social surroundings of the age we live in".
When composing Esther Waters, he wrote to a friend that "people have always written how servants worry us.
I am going to write about how we worry servants".
When considering why the novel was so shocking, it is important to consider the context of the Victorian period that Moore was writing in.
Samuel Johnson had proclaimed a century before "for vice is necessary to be shown, should always disgust" and the novel was certainly a place where the narrative was strictly used to make moral judgements.
Chastity was the "cardinal value" and any character that did not conform was normally given a minor role and would face a tragic consequence.
Yet in Esther Waters, the central protagonist is an illiterate female, a working class servant and a single mother with an illegitimate child.
On all accounts the main subject of Moore's novel is shocking.
Tess is also a 'fallen woman', a single mother and a working servant and she faces similar plot circumstances.
Yet Tess, who is distinct above her peers by her beauty and descent, faces the tragedy of her child dying, marrying and killing her seducer and execution at the end.
I would like to discuss how Esther's representation is different from Tess' in identical situations, as a suggestion of why their consequences are so different.
When Esther gives birth to Jackie, the narrative describes the scene with a high level of subjectivity, although it starts objectively, we soon see the scene and those characters in it from Esther's point of view.
We read how she feels and what she thinks as the narrative even stops and starts with her consciousness.
The birth, although an illegitimate one, is still seen as a celebration; in stark contrast to Tess' birth, which is not even mentioned.
Esther is able to confess her incident to her mother with direct speech clearly and explicitly without pretence, whereas Tess's confession is simply mentioned in the narrative.
Tess mournfully procrastinates her confession to Angel and we finally read that "her narrative ended" whereas Esther is forthright and without disguise as she explains the truth to Fred, even dictating a possible response that he might have.
In conclusion to the comparison, it is clear that Moore gives Esther the voice, through direct speech and narrative focalisation, to express her feelings and actions, in contrast to Tess who is the passive recipient of her circumstances.
Esther's frankness also raises the controversial question of whether she is even repentant or not.
An argument against would suggest that, especially compared with Tess, she is more concerned in persevering forward and providing for her child, than to be sorry for her actions.
Yet I think her faith and understanding of God's character, although possibly small, provides her with an acknowledgment of both her wrongdoing and also her forgiveness.
Throughout the novel, Esther fights for her actions and situation as she defends her child as blameless and even challenges other people's treatment of her.
Moore allows Esther the voice without much comment, yet when he does comment, he does not condemn her, but praises and commends her as "heroic" and criticises society's own part in her struggle.
Lastly, it is worth looking closely at how else in the text Esther is given a voice.
The narrative in the paragraph "Esther looked... William-" begins objectively, yet it soon slips into Esther's voice as we gain access to her thoughts, how things are to her, how they effect her and her responses to them.
The narrative describes "Miss Mary", Esther's name for her friend, it gives us Esther's moral judgment of the activities and then stops sharply as Esther hears voices and loses her train of thought.
Hardy writes long, dense scene-setting paragraphs that, although Tess may be in the scene, are completely distant from and regardless of her, whereas Moore is always concerned  with Esther in a situation.
At Derby Day, we do not read much about the horse racing itself, because Esther does not know much about it, instead Moore depicts the hustle and bustle of the crowd because it interests Esther.
Chapman writes that "the reader is aligned with Esther as she experiences her story" and because she is the controlling consciousness of the novel, the reader is encouraged to sympathise and appreciate her struggle rather than condemn her-an incredibly unique and shocking experience for the Victorian reader.
"Is this a poem?"
may be the first question one can ask while discovering "The first men on Mercury" by Edwin Morgan.
Indeed, its dramatic structure - a dialogue presenting two voices without the intervention of any narrator - looks like a play; the main difference is the absence of stage direction.
The punctuation constitutes the only indication about the manner the words are pronounced by the characters.
The reader has to take elements from the direct speeches to imagine the setting, the characters, and the possible actions that surround the dialogue.
Another very puzzling element is the presence of an incomprehensible language.
The beginning of the text looks completely non-cohesive.
Although the cues seem to be independent, we shall see that there are cohesive devices tying elements of the text together.
The title helps to clarify the situation, announcing that the dialogue is the first encounter between 'Earthmen' and 'Mercurians'.
The formers initiate the conversation by introducing themselves.
The latter's answer is undecipherable but we can notice the repetition of some words, either identically like "bawr", or with variation - maybe "declined" or "conjugated" - like "gawl", "glawp", glawn".
This draws a helpful link between these illegible words.
The question marks also suggest that there is a question-answer pattern, even if we do not understand their meaning.
The most interesting feature in the poem is the exchange of words from one language to the other which gradually leads to a complete adoption of the other's language.
The 'Mercurians' echo the word "men" , then "thmen?"
, the end of the word "earthmen".
They transform the noun group "your leader" into a single noun "yuleeda" , obviously keeping its meaning.
The Earthmen also take some "Mercurian" vocabulary: "benner" , "stretterhawn" .
This progressive change gives the reader a chance to assume the nature of the alien words  and to guess what they could mean.
However the main point is not to understand this language, but rather to witness how quick the characters adopt the other's language and that nevertheless, this is not sufficient to really understand each other and to be able to live together.
The rewrite deals with the same themes  and employs some words and expressions directly taken from the original text .
It also refers back to Morgan's poem with a metatextual allusion: "A thousand transcripts I had written" .
By mentioning the transcript, it offers a new look on the original text and opens a further textual dimension.
In opposition to the neutral report of the dialogue, the rewrite introduces subjectivity through the presence of a narrator: this is one of the astronauts  who is telling his own view of the scene relating it to his personal story.
Avoiding the first person plural pronoun and keeping repeating "I", he places himself as alone against "the whole world" .
He wants to be identified as a victim thanks to the passive form in parallel structures , where "I" is the grammatical subject and the agent of the action is unknown.
It is all the more effective since this is combined with direct speeches reporting an imperative form  and an insult .
Contrary to the original text, this poem only picks up some fragments of direct discourse, clearly identified between inverted comas.
While Edwin Morgan's text witnesses the Earthmen's attempt and failure at establishing a communication, the rewrite describes the different stages the narrator has been through.
The chronology of the events is easily identifiable since it follows the order of the text, and also thanks to the different tenses employed.
Indeed, it starts with the past perfect , then switches to the simple past  before coming to the present tense , and it finally ends with the future tense .
The poem reports the narrator's thoughts as messy and contradictory as they are in his head: at first, he feels like a victim, then like a hero .
He becomes very hopeful about the future, claiming "Nevermore!
", an intertextual reference to Edgar Alan Poe's poem, "the Raven".
But he is soon disillusioned and concludes declaring: "there's nothing I can do", which is also an intertextual reference to the lyrics of "Space Oddity", a song by David Bowie.
An extreme example of his conflicting thoughts is when he switches from "Nothing is ever the same now" to "Everything will ever be the same".
His radical changes of mind seem to be as disturbing as the use of the unknown language in the original text.
The 'Mercurian' words have been chosen for their phonological similarities with English words: "cantantabawr" starts with "can't" which bears the idea of incapability; "warrabost" and "horraber" sound like "war" and "horror".
At this stage, the narrator realizes the impossibility to improve his relation to "the whole world".
The rewrite is built on  Edwin Morgan's original transcript.
The main topic is the same but it is explored from a different perspective.
Instead of reporting a single event , it involves a wider scale in time and space since it covers the whole life of the narrator.
However it presents a very personal viewpoint for it is a first-person narrative.
The two texts are thus complementary.
Having researched the crime/thriller market, I have noticed that there are many types of crime/thriller.
Books written by authors such as Harlan Coben, James Patterson and Martina Cole are tense, action-packed thrillers with many twists and turns.
Novels by authors such as Nicci French and Jilliane Hoffman tend to be darker, psychological chillers.
There are also traditional crime novels which include the conventional hard-boiled detective, such as those written by Agatha Christie.
Novels by authors such as Patricia Cornwell and P.D.
James take a detailed look at the medical side of crime writing, including forensic detail.
Historical crime novels are also becoming popular with titles by Anne Perry and Jacqueline Winspear.
There are also crime novels written by authors such as Nora Roberts and Sandra Brown which are racy blockbusters with plenty of romance and unexpected twists.
There is often a scandalous situation involving members of the elite, usually to do with sex, lies and politics.
I feel that my book would fit into this category, as it is packed with deception, murder and romance and includes an exotic location which is common in these types of books.
For example, the novel Deep and Silent Waters, by Charlotte Lamb is set in Venice and the book French Silk, by Sandra Brown is set in New Orleans.
The intended market for my book is primarily females from the age of twenty.
I feel that my book and my style of writing would appeal to both young females and to an older female audience.
My story is exciting and tense with enough twists and turns to keep reading while the writing is easy to read as well as being racy and sharp.
A common factor of crime and thrillers is to create a serial with a detective or a main character.
Among many are Alex Cross, Dr Kay Scarpetta, Myron Bolitaire and William Monk.
The detective which features in my novel is Detective Adam Belmayne and I can see him becoming a famous serial detective.
I have chosen Hodder Headline as my publisher as they are a well-established company with a good reputation and the existing books in their lists are successful and well-known.
I feel my book would fit well into their lists as it includes authors such as Vena Cork, Elizabeth George and Sandra Brown whose writing is similar to mine.
As Hodder Headline is a well-known publisher, I feel my book would receive a lot of recognition and I feel the publisher would have a lot to offer in terms of marketing and promotion.
There are many ways in which my book can be marketed.
As a first novel, there would be cost limitations, which would result in promoting the book locally.
A common and effective strategy is to use posters.
Teaser posters are often effective, starting off with a tiny bit of information and increasing the information slowly over time.
These posters could appear at bus stops, in bookshops, libraries and sometimes in local magazines or newspapers.
Exclusive book clubs such as World Books or Escape Fiction often have double page spreads on new authors, giving some detail about the book and the author.
As the author, appearing on local radio stations and agreeing to participate in book signing in local libraries and bookshops is a good way of raising recognition and promoting the book without it being too expensive.
Money-off vouchers are also effective as it gives the reader an incentive to buy the book at a cheaper price.
These vouchers can be offered in local bookshops and magazines.
Large bookshops such as Waterstones and Borders also have their own weekly magazine offering reviews and information about forthcoming publications and new authors.
This may also be an effective way of marketing my book.
Prizes and free gifts are also offered when buying a new book.
The novel "Silent Truths" by Susan Lewis was a glamorous novel about the lives of the rich and famous and the book included a competition to win a matching necklace and earring set from Ernest Jones.
As my book is set in an exotic country, there could be a competition to win a free holiday to Barbados.
This would, however, be fairly expensive for the publisher and so there would be limitations.
E. Warwick Slinn describes dramatic monologue as 'the flagship genre of Victorian poetry', which provided 'a medium for multiple forms of cultural critique'.
In Victorian England, the capacity of this form to highlight social and political problems was facilitated by both male and female poets, including Augusta Webster, Christina Rossetti and Robert Browning among others.
These writers used their poetry to display concern for the dominance of men over women in the workforce and the home, as well as to discuss the injustice of class divisions.
The dramatic monologue is a particularly effective method of cultural critique because it firmly detaches the poet from the narrator of a poem.
This allows the poet to speak authentically through the voice of the oppressed or oppressor who is personally affected or affects these cultural problems.
Bonnie J. Robinson reminds us that Victorian poets were often 'liberal thinkers and activists as well as writers', who wrote with an aim to promote cultural awareness and remove injustices from society.
For example, Elizabeth Barrett Browning's The Runaway Slave at Pilgrim's Point was published in the Boston anti-slavery annual in 1848, contributing to the American and British abolition debate in offence of slavery .
While the reader is compelled to sympathise with the illegitimate child voiced in Rossetti's dramatic monologue, The Iniquity of the Fathers Upon the Children, Browning invites us to judge the narrator of his poem, Porphyria's Lover, by offering a psychological insight into the mind of a man who is guilty of domestic violence.
Although dramatic monologue provides poets with an opportunity to elude their gender, there is certainly a pattern which attaches female speakers with female poets and male with male.
Browning's criticisms of his male narrator in My Last Duchess exemplify that writers do not necessarily voice an example of their gender in order to defend these examples or remove themselves from sympathies with the other sex.
However, women writers were keen to extend a single female voice to speak for a plurality of oppressed women who have also been victims of patriarchal society.
For example, Dorothy Mermin describes how Webster's A Castaway 'reached across the iron boundaries of respectability, money, and class to declare sisterhood with sexually disgraced women' in an attempt to relieve tensions of her gender in 19 th century Britain.
In this dramatic monologue, Webster defends disreputable women from society's stereotypical presentation of prostitutes by highlighting flaws within society that lead ordinary women to such a degrading occupation.
Christine Sutphin observes that 'Webster showed up not only the economic and moral oppression of women, but the poverty of the transformative ideology'.
Webster's narrator, Eulalie, displays society's disillusion with the marriage ideal, which confines women to the mundane, domestic sphere, monogamy and dependence on men for economic and moral welfare.
Eulalie claims that she does not at all envy married women, who she prefers to address as 'Dianas under lock and key', suggesting her resentment for the entrapment of women in the home.
Sarah Ellis did not see this confinement as totally negative, but uncommonly viewed it as critical 'in fostering female self-respect' and re-establishing 'a balance of power between husband and wife'.
While Eulalie cannot perceive this balance, she can identify with women who thrive in the domestic realm since her diary informs her that she was once a 'budding colourless young rose of home'  with 'no wishes, no cares' and 'no hopes' .
While she goes on to admit that her domestic days were 'better days' , she relates this experience to being a child, rather than a woman; to someone who is growing up, not someone who has grown up only to achieve this simple life.
It becomes clear that Eulalie does not reject domesticity, but desires to firmly detach herself from its associations.
She questions the justice in perceiving that a woman is only as good as she is good to her husband , pities women who wear 'no kisses but their husband's upon lips'  and the girl who 'not in the woman's true place, the wife's place'  is not able to pilot her own life.
For Eulalie, it is not natural to become a wife or a mother since she hates men and believes that her occupation has not designed her as the role model she needs to be in order to bring up a child.
Sutphin sees her rejection of motherhood as the poem's most controversial statement: In a society where motherhood was synonymous with being a woman, Eulalie completely divorces herself from society's expectations of womanhood, implying that these designs need to undergo drastic change before they can satisfy this social group.
Webster displays her ambivalence towards the morality of prostitution through the use of techniques which are specifically applicable to the dramatic monologue.
In reading this form of poetry, the reader should be aware that it 'creates speakers who are less concerned with truth than they are with "trying to impress it on the outside world"'.
Therefore, the reader must acknowledge that the speaker has designed this poem with an intention to defend disreputable women and, therefore, is advised to be reluctant to rely upon Eulalie's honesty.
Webster directs the reader to dishonest words when the speaker claims that she is modest, which is immediately contradicted with a confession that she flouts herself.
The speaker realises her inconsistency and hesitantly stutters, 'but yet, but yet' , indicating her eagerness to defend herself and continue to engage her audience.
Webster interjects irony into her poem when Eulalie decides that, since her personal thoughts will not meet judgement, there is no need to worry about being a hypocrite .
This logic could lead her to liberate her voice from untruth since there's no one to judge her or, contrastingly, from truth as there's no one to disprove her lies.
This ambiguity is skilfully placed in the text to remain in our minds while the speaker argues that her trade is relatively moral to that of a lawyer or a journalist.
This technique allows Webster to distance herself from these culturally damning perceptions as they can be excused as opinions which, like the speaker, she does not truly believe.
This idea becomes more probable when considered in conjunction with Sutphin's suggestion that, while women writers were keen to defend disreputable women, 'they were not immune to the idea that prostitutes were irrevocably "diseased"' .
Webster may be keen to identify society's restrictions upon women as the root of this culture and suggest that the prostitute was once the ordinary woman framed by social pressures, but she is certainly reluctant to display prostitution as a decent way of living.
In many ways, highlighting its degrading weight on women would assist her argument in support of social change.
Webster does not hesitate to criticise men throughout this poem by reminding the reader that their immorality allows the speaker to continue her immoral trade by creating demand for prostitution.
Eulalie does not feel that her occupation is particularly harmful because the only people she affects are wives and she does not take anything off these 'poor fools' that is worth keeping .
She strengthens her argument by establishing herself as an experienced figure to judge men as she can 'perceive there are more men than one', unlike blinded, monogamous women .
Eulalie challenges society's perception of men by removing any illusion that her clientele are 'simple' and the victims of her predatory advances .
To the contrary, they 'have their favourite sinnings planned / to do them civilly and sensibly' .
The speaker insists that she attracts supposedly civil, sensible and educated men who society would regard as honourable.
Webster locates weaknesses in a society which cannot correctly separate the moral from the immoral, and places the prostitute and her client in opposing categories based upon gender.
Kathryn Gleadle deposits prostitutes in a band of women who 'appear to have perceived their labour as a necessary, if often grim, strategy which would enable them to earn much-needed money'.
In expressing a poorly-educated, single woman, with only a neglectful brother to boast as family connections, Webster attaches Eulalie's circumstances to financial insecurity.
While the speaker is concerned for the goodness of her soul, her immediate concern is the survival of her body and she is therefore required to prioritise money over morals.
She explains that, while her brother's university education was funded, her rights to education were neglected but she 'saw never aught to murmur at'  in this system.
She believes that ''Twas no one's fault'  that her parents chose to invest money into the education of their son as they were sensible to perceive that this would lead him to a respectable occupation, unlike a woman.
Eulalie regards Britain's attempts to elevate women to the level of men through education as pretence of 'teaching them / what no one ever cares that they should know' .
She argues that offering women education is simply an outward display of efforts, with no serious intent on valuing their ability in the workforce.
The narrator elevates herself above the common prostitute because she has a home 'all velvet and marqueterie and pastilles'  rather than exhibiting herself 'at infamous corners' .
She becomes accustomed to these luxuries, admitting that the refuge did not suit her because it reduced her lifestyle from 'pampering to half-famishing' .
At this point in the poem, the reader realises that, though Eulalie does not enjoy the dirtiness and loneliness of the prostitute lifestyle, she cannot give up the luxuries that it has afforded her.
It becomes clear that, while prostitution is not necessary to preserve her life, it is necessary to afford her lifestyle and, with her poor education and skills, an alternative occupation that maintains her wealth does not exist for her.
Christina Rossetti's The Iniquity of the Fathers Upon the Children similarly defends a disgraced class of people by voicing Margaret, an illegitimate child who is interminably stained with the personal and social shame of her ignoble birth.
She blames her father who 'wrought' upon the 'foolish youth'  of her mother.
There is certainly some suggestion that the mother was a victim of physical and sexual abuse, suggested by the dynamic force of the father's actions and the emphasis on the mother's youth.
In conjunction with these implications, she perceives her mother as a victim, like herself, who suffers a greater burden than that passed down to her: 'A lifelong lie for truth' .
As well as defending the shames brought on women by the immoral conduct of men, Rossetti describes the ill treatment Margaret endures by society in order to provoke pity from the Victorian audience and encourage them to reshape their opinions of these innocent children.
Without the skills or authority to voice their own unhappiness, Rossetti enters the mind of a defenceless child in protection of her interests.
When Margaret is removed from her biological mother, Rossetti introduces the total antithesis of the young girl in the form of a generous, 'jewelled' and 'grand' lady , who does not allow her superior class and respectability to interfere in nurturing Margaret like a daughter.
In the child's idolisation of her Lady, Rossetti displays admiration for a woman who is able to overlook external class divisions in search for the child's internal morality.
While Rossetti designs a role model for society in this woman, she contrasts her modesty with that of her visitors, who, for all their nobility, cannot conceal their contempt of Margaret.
The child narrates that 'the women speak and stare / And mean to be so civil'  and highlights the excessive pride of those 'who sit as struck with blindness' as if she wasn't there .
By rejecting and sneering at her existence, Margaret tolerates their torment until she is 'almost ready'  to wish death upon herself.
While she begins to feel like she belongs to her Lady, indicated by her eagerness to define herself as 'almost child' to this figure, this progress is undone by her contemptuous guests, which signals how her happiness is completely dependent on society's acceptance of her.
While Browning often facilitates the freedom of the dramatic monologue's unrestricted structure to develop a conversational tone, Rossetti chooses to regulate her verse using iambic trimeter.
The nursery-rhyme echoes of the iambic rhythm successfully connect the verse with children, assisting Rossetti in authentically immersing herself in a young mind.
Unlike Webster's Eulalie, this voice is not vulnerable to judgement from the reader as its youth suggests innocence that is yet to be corrupted by skills in deceit.
Robert Browning's My Last Duchess voices a historical figure, the Duke of Ferrara, who was suspected of poisoning his seventeen-year old bride, Lucrezia de Medici in 1561.
The poet traces back to an event in history to display a contemporary problem in Victorian Britain.
Melissa Valiska Gregory reports that 'historical work on the subject of sexual violence within the Victorian home suggests that it was a relatively common feature of domestic life'.
While this is highly problematic in a society which sought to create a sanctuary for women in the domestic setting, Browning portrays 'the dynamics of the home as deeply painful for both men and women...in the struggle for sexual dominance between husbands and wives' .
An example of female dominance can be seen in Browning's Andrea del Sarto which voices the unhappiness of a man who justifiably suspects his wife of infidelity.
However, these roles are completely reversed in My Last Duchess, where the jealous and untrusting Duke cannot control his suspicions, leading him to cruelly assert control over his wife through murder.
Spoken by the Duke, Browning shapes possible psychological motives behind such an attack and the reader becomes more educated about the speaker than his Duchess, in discordance with the poem's title.
The reader is encouraged to judge the morality of the Duke as this form of poetry ironically allows the reader to understand 'more than the speaker understands' .
Browning speaks through the voice of the Duke to reveal his flawed character to the reader.
The reader builds an awareness of the power of the speaker's imagination to shape immorality in his wife, while, blinded by his jealousy and pride, the narrator remains completely ignorant of these details.
The opening line immediately indicates The Duke of Ferrara as a possessive and unaffectionate collector of wives.
The use of the demonstrative pronoun, 'That's', perfectly demonstrates his impersonal attachment to his 'last' Duchess in a sequence of unfortunate wives.
He prefers to speak indirectly about his spouse through her painting, rather than the lady herself, and avoids the familiarity of naming her personally throughout this monologue, suggesting his scornful rejection of her.
In describing his wife's treatment of him and other men, he fails to convince the reader that, regardless of punishment by death, her behaviour deserved to be punished at all.
He suggests that she practiced flirtatious behaviour with other men as 'her looks went everywhere' , but he better implies his damaged pride that she didn't spend her days looking up to him.
He expresses that she thanked men for gifts 'somehow - I know not how' , but unintentionally displays his irrationality in using only his imagination as evidence of his wife's offences.
He snobbishly cannot tolerate that she reduced his 'gift of a nine-hundred-years-old name' to 'anybody's gift' , revealing his arrogance and excessive pride in his noble birth.
R.W.
Buchanan described Browning's eagerness to judge men as comparable with 'a messenger from heaven, sent to teach the highest of all lessons to rashly-judging men'.
The Duke certainly doesn't escape Browning's criticisms as the reader is invited to judge him while he enjoys unfairly judging his late wife.
Following revelations of weaknesses in his character, he goes on to explain that his wife was completely ignorant of his dissatisfaction with her behaviour as she received no warning from him.
He places what he should have said in speech marks throughout the poem, yet these words remain a mere unperformed rehearsal of his intentions, as he was too cowardly to verbally address marital problems with his wife.
Browning implies that he never spoke of them through fear that he would fail in managing her and exercises his new freedoms now she 'stands'  there in a stationary form as a manageable painting.
In a description of their final engagement together, the Duke confesses that he only gave commands immediately before 'all smiles stopped together' .
While his frustration with her treatment of other men discarded his authority in their relationship, she is reduced to the role of the passive by his imperatives and violent termination of her life.
Browning heavily criticises the merciless nature of a man who rashly punished his wife, not only without evidence of her convictions, but without delivering a warning of his dissatisfaction.
In Webster's A Castaway, we imagine that Eulalie writes or speaks her monologue in isolation without a present auditor, causing her to develop an argument in anticipation of objections from her absent, imagined judge.
However, Browning imagines an engagement between the Duke and the father of his next bride where the Duke presents his last Duchess in the form of a threat to her successor.
Browning indicates the presence of the auditor by using the formal address, 'Sir' and the use of the second person pronoun.
While the auditor in dramatic monologue is 'constituted more by the speaker's perceptions than by any separate reality' , there is only a single indication that the father managed to insert any speech into the conversation.
This can be found in the Duke's response 'Nay, we'll go / Together down, sir'  near the end of their acquaintance, implying that the Duke has been questioned.
Gregory perceives the parallels between the 'rhetorically violent' speaker who forces his speech upon the listener and the dominance of domestic violence .
The Duke displays modesty only once throughout his speech, when he ironically claims to lack skill in this very area.
The reader is aware of the strength of his rhetoric, placing him closer to his flawed character with pretended modesty.
While the use of the dramatic monologue to criticise society is common to both male and female writers, their genders often decide that of the speaker they decide to voice.
Therefore, female writers commonly voice the oppressor, and male, the oppressed.
The task of women writers is particularly remarkable because they place prostitutes and illegitimate children, not only as the subject, but the narrators of the poem, which was a brave practice in this hostile society.
For example, Dante Gabriel Rossetti uses the prostitute, Jenny as the subject of his poem of the same name, but does not attribute her with a voice or active role in the poem.
Men and women are united in their concern for oppressed gender, but women writers discuss issues indirectly in defence of themselves and their interests.
The dramatic monologue requires the writer to adopt different techniques and styles to authenticate themselves as the speaker of the poem and they are keen to design dramatic monologue as a political statement by encompassing a plurality of voices in a single voice.
While Browning often fails to solve moral problems in his dramatic monologue, women writers provide society with answers in ambitious hope to inspire social change.
The extracts from the poems Binsey Poplars by Gerard Manley Hopkins, and The Love Song of Alfred J. Prufrock by T. S. Eliot share a common theme which is that of cities.
In the case of the poem Binsey Poplars, the city of Oxford.
Whilst Hopkins 'laments the felling of poplars in the village of Binsey outside Oxford' , T. S. Eliot visualises a situation in an unknown city where fog dashes around the houses like a cat.
In addition to the common elements of a rather negative description of a city and its happenings, both extracts from the much longer poems have some stylistic features in common, but at the same time are different in some instances of their use of sounds, words, figurative language, sentence structure and shapes and patterns.
The extract from Binsey Poplars consists of one stanza, written in the indicative and simple past as well as present perfect, which is comprised of eight lines following an irregular rhyme scheme - a b a c d a c c - with several internal rhymes between the words quelled and felled, dandled and sandaled, and the half rhyme between shadow and meadow.
Furthermore, the poem consists of iambic and trochaic feet, but there is no clear stress pattern which structures the whole poem.
The alliteration of the initial sounds such as [kw] in quelled and quenched, the lateral [l] in leaves and leaping, the fricatives [f] in felled, following and folded and [s] in sandalled, swam and sank and the approximant [w] in wind-wandering weed-winding as well as the assonance in leaves and leaping and in followed and folded show that the poem is characterised by its outstanding use of alliteration and assonance.
The choice of these sounds has an effect on the poem, since the fricatives are linked with 'friction, hissing [and] scratching' , which supports the ire of the poet as he sees the felled trees as well as the approximant [w] which can be regarded as a 'continuous [flowing] sound' , representing the wind and the water mentioned at the end of the poem.
Hopkins's choice of words is based upon frequent alliteration and also upon his repetition of words such as quelled, felled and all.
He even uses a repetition of a whole sentence pattern in line three and line five, giving the reader the feeling of an outcry and exclamatory emphasis.
The change of semantics of the word wind in line eight is remarkable.
Hopkins alters the word by adding  - ing to it when it occurs for a second time.
Therefore the meaning, although the word winding reminds one strongly of the word wind, becomes different.
An unusual word collocation can be found among line six and seven where Hopkins used an enjambment between the words sandalled and shadow.
Whereas sandalled is normally linked with shoes and therefore with a person, it is now connected with shadow.
In this, together with the use of dear in relation to my aspens, the poem shows an personification of nature and a metaphorical language.
Hopkins's metaphorical language is complemented by antonyms such as swam and sank or fresh and felled - pairs which interestingly consist of the same fricative sounds.
This reveals how well structured and how elaborate the poem Binsey Poplars is, although it only consists of two complex sentences.
The fragment of The Love Song of Alfred J. Prufrock is composed of one stanza, written in the imperative, simple present, present continuous and simple past, offering a rather mystical view of an unknown city.
The extract from the poem consists of eight lines in which only line six and line eight rhyme with each other.
Metrically, only line one and two, due to their parallel structure, are equal, whereas the following lines have no continuous stress pattern.
Alliteration can be found for the fricative sounds [f] in falls from, [s] in soot, slipped, sudden, seeing and soft as well as [ð] in the and that and in the lateral [l] at the beginning of line three, four and five.
As mentioned before, fricatives are regarded to cause 'friction' , which the fog and smoke actually do in line one and two by rubbing their backs or muzzles against the window-panes.
In addition to alliteration Eliot uses assonance in words such as leap and  asleep.
Eliot's choice of words is characterised by the repetition of words such as back, upon and the different forms of the verb to fall.
This repetition of individual words is complemented by the method of parallelism used in line one and two.
According to Short , the 'interesting [thing] about parallel structures, in addition to their perceptual prominence, is that they invite the reader to search for meaning connections between the parallel structures, in particular in terms of parts which are varied.'
By analysing the first two lines of this poem with regard to this statement, one recognises that they are the only ones written in the simple present with a simple sentence structure and that within these lines only the nouns fog and back differ from smoke and muzzle.
The very same words, together with several other words in this poem such as the combination of the words fog or smoke with rubs and tongue or the phrase corner of the evening, offer unusual collocations.
Fog has no back, and smoke has no muzzle or tongue and neither of them can rub against window-panes.
Eliot's choice of such central nouns in the poem offers, along with his remarkable selection of verbs such as curled, licked or seeing, a second dimension to the poem.
Throughout the poem the reader has the feeling that the fog and smoke are behaving in the manner of a cat.
This is extremely metaphorical language, where one cannot be sure if 'the fog has turned into a cat, or [if] the cat has turned into the fog' , which makes use of the method of personification, or perhaps "animalisation" in this case.
The word corner is normally used in conjunction with a building, shape, room or road and not, as the poem uses it, in the unusual collocation the corner of the evening, with a specific part of the day.
Even the colour yellow which is normally seen as positive and can be connected with flowers or the sun, is attached to negative words such as fog and smoke.
With this change to the usual semantics and Eliot's playfulness with words in general, he emphasises the extraordinary events in this unknown city, where the cat seems to symbolise something positive in contrast to the rather negative fog and smoke.
By comparing both poems to each other, one has to recognise that, although they are from different authors and were written at a different time, they are quite similar.
Both poets make an extensive use of alliteration, assonance, metaphors and repetition, and share an extraordinary point of view of a city.
Whereas Hopkins laments the deforestation of trees near Oxford, T. S. Eliot let us experience a city through the eyes of smoke, fog and a cat.
Beside these similarities, each poem has its special features.
Binsey Poplars has enjambments, internal rhymes and antonyms while The Love Song of Alfred J. Prufrock offers a parallelism and an extraordinary use of verbs.
The Gothic was a major product of Romanticism.
Writers such as Horace Walpole, Ann Radcliffe and William Lewis are sometimes described as the "early masters and mistresses of the genre."
In the eighteenth century, the term "Gothic" carried powerful and negative connotations.
It signified "a 'barbarous', and 'medieval' past .
.
.used derogatively about art, architecture and writing that failed to conform to the standards of neoclassical taste.
.
.and signified the lack of morality and reason."
Ann Radcliffe, one of the first Gothicists differentiated between the different types of Gothic.
Not only is there terror and horror Gothic, but rationalized and unrationalized Gothic.
Terror Gothic attempts to elicit psychological fear.
Radcliffe's The Mysteries of Udolpho is just one example.
Horror Gothic focuses on bodily gore and violence.
Radcliffe states that "terror and horror are so far opposite, that the first expands the soul and awakens the faculties to a high degree of life; the other freezes and nearly annihilates them."
Rationalized Gothic, such as Austen's Northanger Abbey attempts to reveal the mystery by explaining the supernatural element.
Unrationalized cannot explain the supernatural.
For example, in The Monk and The Ancient Mariner, the supernatural cannot be rationalized. "
.
.
.where Radcliffe explained the supernatural as the product of natural causes, Lewis left it as a problem."
The term 'subversive' generally means to tackle conventions or to be revolutionary.
Can this be applied to the Gothic?
Many argue that the Gothic in the eighteenth century was subversive as it certainly provoked many negative responses.
When William Lewis first published The Monk, in 1796, it was received with outrage and disgust because of its sexual violence and explicit descriptions.
People were outraged that this book was written by a Member of Parliament.
Upon publication, Lewis "foolishly bragged on the title page that he had just been elected a Member of Parliament, which made the novel's immorality even more threatening."
Coleridge's review of The Monk appeared in the Critical Review, where he blasted the novel as "blasphemous."
Lewis was forced to produce a censored version, after a law suit, deeming the work as obscene and blasphemous.
Coleridge was outraged that Lewis was a man of rank and fortune.
"Yes!
The author .
.
.signs himself a LEGISLATOR!- We stare and tremble."
Thomas Mathias in The Pursuits of Literature shared Coleridge's views and was repulsed by The Monk and the fact that Lewis was very young when he wrote the novel.
Horace Walpole, the author of The Castle of Otranto was also a man of privileged background, being the son of Britain's first Prime Minister.
The fact that these men had a say in the running and decision-making of the country was subversive in itself when coupled with the themes and ideology in the Gothic novel.
"A legislator in our own parliament, a member of the House of Commons .
.
.an elected guardian and defender of the laws .
.
.has neither scrupled nor blushed to depict and to publish .
.
.the arts of lewd .
.
.seduction, and to thrust upon the nation the most open and unqualified blasphemy .
.
."
Religion, sex, incest, matricide, Satan worship and the supernatural are just some of the common themes in Gothic works.
The theme of concealment and revelation is also present in the Gothic.
Wordsworth and Coleridge's Lyrical Ballads also include many Gothic themes.
For example, The Ancient Mariner focuses on the element of the supernatural and the sublime and The Dungeon emphasises on the theme of enclosure and concealment.
The Romantics focused on primitivism, the importance of passion and emotion.
Lyrical Ballads endorse all of these things.
However, they were not always met with approval.
Sir Walter Scott claims that Wordsworth "stoops to vulgar language."
One article in the Edinburgh Review claimed that ".
.
.
connects lofty conceptions with objects his readers will think of as low, silly and uninteresting."
Religion is a very prominent theme in Gothic works, particularly in The Monk.
Catholicism is criticized and displayed as a superstitious denomination filled with lustful monks bent on sexual perversion and obsession.
Lewis's fusion of sex and religion was not very popular.
Having a man of the clergy commit rape and murder would be considered extremely shocking to some members of the public.
In his article Europhobia, Robert Miles focuses on the opening chapter in The Monk.
Miles looks at how Lewis has created an image of the Catholic church as being a sexual meeting place rather than one of worship.
"In short, it is a society that is worldly when it ought to be religious and religious when it ought to be worldly."
Lewis's critique of religion overlaps with the shared interest of Wordsworth and Coleridge to explore and discover.
This opinion of Catholicism is extremely prejudice and subversive in itself, which is why many branded the novel as blasphemous.
Religion is present in The Ancient Mariner and a shared theme of the wandering Jew occurs in both works.
This portrays the anti-religious views of the authors.
The Mad Mother in Lyrical Ballads mirrors the theme of the dead baby in The Monk.
It is a very dark poem, describing the mother clutching the dead baby to her in a similar way to Agnes in The Monk.
The lurid descriptions in the novel were not well received.
The language was attacked for being too explicit.
The description of the putrefying baby challenged sensibility and taste and would have been considered as unfit reading material, especially for women.
The rape scene in The Monk is a classic example as it is filled with emotive language and imagery.
Byron, whose works tackled conventions themselves, noted that "these descriptions ought to have been written by Tiberius at Caprea - they are forced - the philtered ideas of a jaded voluptuary."
The violent and rich language was definitely considered subversive at the time of publication and was also deemed unnatural, by no other than Wordsworth.
He described the gothic as "contemptuous" and stated his "desire for plain language."
Interestingly, however, Wordsworth's Goody Blake and Harry Gill, also carries the theme of brutalising a woman and cursing to God, which mirrors the way the monk curses Agnes.
Homosexuality is often linked to the gothic novel.
Many thinkers conclude that the Gothic novel is a reflection on the author.
It is interesting that most Gothic writers were men of privilege, such as Walpole, Beckford and Byron.
Beckford, in fact had to abandon his parliamentary seat due to a homosexual scandal in 1784.
During the eighteenth century, sodomy was a capital offence and after the French Revolution, homosexual persecution intensified due to heightened anxieties.
Robert Miles asks, "how then, did Lewis get away with his 'open secret'?"
Miles goes on to explain that due to their class and social position, their "secret" remained safe as long as they behaved decorously. "
.
..there is a long list of distinguished male Gothic writers who were either overtly or covertly homosexual.
.
.
its main practitioners were upper-class Englishmen whose homosexuality was either an open secret or one much speculated upon."
An example of homosexuality in The Monk is the relationship between Ambrosio and Rosario, the novice.
Tuite describes this as "the romance plot of monastic male homoeroticism."
The relationship mirrors the ancient Greek relationships between young male novices and older men.
Of course, Rosario is in fact Mathilda.
She is disguised as a man and then reveals herself as the devil.
Throughout the novel, we are constantly unsure of the true sex of Mathilda.
Is she a woman or a man?
The theme of concealment and revelation is clearly evident here and this may be conveying the repressed homosexual desire felt by the Abbot, or even by Lewis.
Norton believes the novel reflects Lewis's homosexuality.
".
.
.
as well as his subversive desire to shock his morally complacent elders .
.
.Lewis's analysis of repressed desire is compelling .
.
."
As homosexuality was a serious crime during the Romantic period, this would have been considered transgressive and immoral.
There are also views on the gothic being pornographic as the texts often aim at eliciting a physical or physiological response from the reader in the same way that pornography does.
Lewis seeks a response by his use of emotive language, such as "nakedness" and "tear off those garments."
He also engages in the senses, making for realistic description.
The monk also seems to rejoice in the rape of Antonia.
He is described as "accomplishing" his crime, almost as if it is a positive, rewarding act.
Coleridge attacked the novel's "libidinous minuteness."
A recurring theme in the gothic is voyeurism and the idea of watching people watching, which again symbolises cloistered pleasures.
This is often thought of as very erotic.
In his critique, Coleridge condemns the sexual content of the book, suggesting it completely subversive.
In the Monk, Ambrosio looks on Antonia by use of the mirror.
In Lyrical Ballads, we see this theme being used in The Thorn.
The poem is about watching a lady watching a grave.
Again, this is used as a tool to seek a physical and also a psychological response.
In Lyrical Ballads, Wordsworth and Coleridge wanted to blend together the unknown with the familiar to create uncertainty and anxiety.
Coleridge stated that the aim was to "excite a feeling analogous to the supernatural, by awakening the mind's attention from the lethargy of custom."
The theme of the supernatural and the rich language is often considered as sublime, which can be both large and scary but also very pleasurable, which leads us back to the idea of the Gothic being very sexual.
If the Gothic novel is always subversive, why did it prove to be so popular during the Romantic period?
As Norton states, "the most popular literature in Britain during the late eighteenth .
.
.century was not the Romantic poetry, but 'the latest trash of the day': the Gothic novel."
This may prove to some extent the theory that the Gothic was not as subversive as expected.
Although Wordsworth spoke out against the Gothic in his preface to Lyrical Ballads, his works adopt many Gothic conventions and themes.
For example, many of the poems' content include barbarity, religion, motherhood, the supernatural, enclosure and exposure.
Coleridge was influenced by many Gothic works.
In fact, many writers were influenced by the Gothic.
Austen felt compelled to write a parody on the Gothic with Northanger Abbey and Lewis was in fact influenced by the works of the Marquis de Sade.
The Gothic may be seen as being a set of conventions rather than a genre.
Shakespeare may be considered as one of the first writers to include Gothic conventions in his works.
Macbeth and Hamlet both include the theme of the supernatural and sublime.
Folk stories including demons, ghosts and medieval settings were told for years.
Graveyard poetry were also very Gothic in content and were widely read before the Romantic period.
For example, Robert Blair's The Grave, published in 1743 is a poem which engages the senses and focuses on the atmosphere of the night.
Graveyard poetry is also concerned with exploring mortality and religion.
As these poems and stories have been around for years, the Gothic did not develop in the Romantic period and so it wasn't as revolutionary or transgressive as it would seem.
There are many writers who perceive the Gothic to be a type of "revolt against rationality, modernity or the Enlightenment."
The Gothic is also misconceived as being examples of dream-writing or fantasy-like fiction.
Dreams in Gothic writing is very popular.
In The Monk, Antonia wakes from a nightmare to find herself in a nightmare.
Walpole's Castle of Otranto is known to have been originated in a dream.
Many thinkers reject this anti-realist view and protest that the Gothic novel reflects society.
"Gothic functions as the mirror of eighteenth century mores and values: a reconstruction of the past as the inverted, mirror image of the present."
The repercussions of the French Revolution led to anxiety in society and xenophobia, which is why many Gothic works are set in European cities and display Catholic characters as superstitious and perverse.
The Monk for example, is set in Madrid.
Fear and paranoia about wars, bloodbaths and revolutions is reflected in many Gothic works.
For example, in The Monk, the church is set on fire and we see plenty of blood in the novel.
In Wordsworth's The Convict, we see this fear relayed in the bloody imagery and alienation from society.
The Gothic may also be trying to compare Britain to these European cities. "
.
.
.
recalls a Gothic heritage to contrast an ordered and civilised England with a monstrously unnatural, irrational and barbaric France."
This suggests that the Gothic reflects the xenophobia of society.
Romantic Britain was largely Protestant and so the attack on Catholicism would not have been completely ill-received.
Society was in fact now beginning to be open to new, secular views and ideology.
The fact that the Romantic period emphasised the importance of raw emotion, feeling and passion as opposed to reason and rationality , the content of the Gothic novel would have been expected.
A shared interest in uncertainty of disintegration and alienation in society is evident in The Monk and Lyrical Ballads.
Ambrosio becomes an outcast and recieves his punishment.
In the poems in Lyrical Ballads we see the importance of affection as the opposite end of alienation.
If the Gothic is mirroring the social problems of the day, it wouldn't necessarily be considered subversive or revolutionary, but rather reactionary.
"After all .
.
.the leading Gothicists were anti-revolutionary; Walpole .
.
.would have regarded socialism with disgust; Radcliffe was deeply conservative and Lewis was a capitalist slave-owner."
The Monk was not only subjected to unpleasant reviews.
In the Vindication of The Monk, the critic realises the books worth.
"I hear an immediate outcry raised against me - What!
Defend a bad book - a work of licentiousness and blasphemy?
.
.
.I do not pretend to defend a bad book .
.
.
I ask this simple question - is the picture of vice .
.
.a dangerous sight?
.
.
.is it not attended with good effects, by acting as a beacon to mankind?"
This proves that the novel received some good reviews and was therefore not entirely subversive.
In their turn, Lyrical Ballads were also well received and appreciated.
"In Lyrical Ballads, Wordsworth was a bold and fortunate innovator .
.
.he has taught us new sympathies."
How far can we conclude that the Gothic is always subversive?
There is evidence to support the fact that the Gothic raised outrage and disgust by many writers and thinkers at the time, due to its lewd descriptions and controversial themes.
However, one must take into account the influence the Gothic had on many writers of the period, as previously shown.
The Gothic may indeed be described as tackling conventions, but is it subversive in the pejorative sense that it is assumed?
The critic, Montague Summers claims that "the 'spirit' of Gothic fiction was the quintessence of Romanticism and that: 'The Romanticist is not a revolutionary; he is rather a reactionary.'"
However, although the Gothic tried to mirror the social upheaval of the day, it cannot be denied that it was received with shock and disgust and was more than once described as "subversive."
The interpretation of the Bible has been at the centre of political and theological debates throughout the course of history, and remains the cause of various social and cultural tensions in the present day.
Probably the most key period in the development of biblical interpretation was that of the sixteenth-century European Reformation.
Stimulated by the works of Erasmus and Christian Humanism, the Reformation "sought reform of the universal Catholic Church", and essentially transformed Christianity.
Reformers highlighted errors and forgeries within the Catholic faith, and more importantly asserted the intellectual, and ultimately spiritual, independence of the laity.
Whilst the doctrinal authority of the Church has been questioned by such movements, there have also been a number of powerful figures throughout history who have used the Bible as an instrument of power.
One of the most notable is King Henry VIII who abused the fractious state of Christianity during the Reformation, manipulating scripture in order to enhance his power.
In 1531 the convocation of England accepted Henry VIII as Head of the Church in England 'as far as the law of God allows' enabling the King to grant his own right to divorce.
This in turn led to the dissolution of the monasteries which not only suppressed some of the most vociferous opponents of Henry's most recent legislation, but resulted in the crown making great financial profit.
The oppression that results from such abuse of power and manipulation of Biblical texts and ideas has been translated into literature through the genre of dystopic fiction.
The term dys-topians was first used in 1868 by J.S.
Mill, who wrote of them: "What is commonly called Utopian is something too good to be practicable; but what they appear to favour is too bad to be practicable."
However, the term dystopia was not coined until much later in the twentieth century.
Biblical themes have been increasingly drawn upon in order to address contemporary issues in modern literature.
Many authors return to what Jasper calls the "late twentieth century obsession with the apocalyptic", the literature of which "lends itself especially to the genre of science fiction", a key element in the texts I will refer to in this essay.
The imagined nightmarish societies represented in George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four and Margaret Atwood's The Handmaid's Tale illustrate clearly the distinctions between a dystopian society and the more conventional ideas of a "Utopia" as envisaged by Sir Thomas More.
Atwood combines the dystopic genre with Biblical allusion in her novel in order to highlight a number of contemporary and feminist issues, whilst Nineteen Eighty-Four has been widely perceived as novel of "social comment, and even prophecy".
In this essay I will explore the ways in which problems of interpretation and the abuse of scripture have been translated into dystopic fiction and the issues that are consequently unveiled.
Margaret Atwood's The Handmaid's Tale is based around the fictional fundamentalist Republic of Gilead.
The novel is "set in the near future, in a United States which is in the hands of a power-hungry elite who have used their own brand of 'Bible-based' religion as an excuse for the suppression of the majority of the population."
In his book Rescuing the Bible from Fundamentalism, John Shelby Spong argues that a "major function of fundamentalist religion is to bolster deeply insecure and fearful people...by justifying a way of life with all of its defining prejudices."
Gilead is indeed presented as a society "under a good deal of pressure, demographic and otherwise".
Its consequent fundamentalist approach to the Bible imposes "a patriarchal order on society and family alike."
However, what I would argue to be perhaps more disturbing than the simple irony of a terrifying society claiming to live "literally by biblical principles", is how this religious fundamentalism is forcefully imposed upon what Booker describes as "a stupefied populace".
Moreover, it is the abuse of women that results from the "use of the Bible as an instrument of oppression, coercion and the sustaining of privilege and power."
As in the Old Testament, "patriarchal authority is justified as the law of God" within Gilead and biblical allusions are abundant throughout The Handmaid's Tale.
One of the most poignant intertextual uses of the Bible is the way in which Atwood has reworked the words of Jesus of Nazareth.
Kreizer argues that, to an extent, Gilead becomes a "parody of the Kingdom of God."
During the narrative of her first shopping trip, the protagonist and narrator, Offred, reflects upon some of the teachings she received at the Rachel and Leah re-education centre: "The Republic of Gilead, said Aunt Lydia, knows no bounds.
Gilead is within you."
This final statement is taken directly from Luke 17:20-21 where Jesus tells the Pharisees, "The kingdom of God commeth not with observation...the kingdom of God is within you."
This parody suggests that like the Kingdom of God, Gilead is "not like an earthly kingdom with geographical boundaries...it begins with... [Gilead's] Spirit in people's lives and relationships."
It is made clear here the ways in which the Gileadean authorities are manipulating Scripture in order to justify their social policies and make clear the extent of their control.
// Possibly the most pivotal aspect of the biblical rhetoric of Gilead is the manipulation of the Genesis story of Jacob, Rachel and Bilhah , presented in the prefatory material.
Ketterer  considers this passage to be "the 'essential seed' of the novel."
The passage is one of several stories of surrogate mothers in the Old Testament, another earlier and more famous one being that of Sarah, Hagar and Abraham.
This source not only "provides the biblical precedent for sexual practices in Gilead", but, more importantly, "opens the way to a feminist critique of patriarchy where women are regarded as nothing but sexual and domestic commodities."
Ostriker suggests that "the recurrent figure of the barren mother", or wife, in the book of Genesis is indicative of "the power of the father-God over fertility, a process formerly female."
Gilead is what Jasper describes as "a post-nuclear holocaust America", where the effects of nuclear warfare have left many women infertile.
The biblical motif of the servant woman, or handmaid, bearing children for their barren mistress is cultivated into this imaginary dystopic society, whereby young and fertile women are "enslaved as concubines" to stimulate procreation.
Although Ostriker's views on the implications of such practices upon male power are indeed valid, I would suggest that in Atwood's novel, the men involved are not so glorified.
As Clarke argues, the way in which Rachel's desperate suggestion that her maid Bilhah "shall bear upon my knees, that I may also have children by her" is disturbingly applied to the "act of conception" in fact imposes "physical and mental humiliation on both handmaid and wife, and also...on the husband."
George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four shares a number of key features with The Handmaid's Tale, offering a strong warning against totalitarian regimes.
Orwell was alarmed when he came to realise that "the novelty of totalitarianism lay in the mutability as well as the unchallengeability of its dogmas."
This might be related closely to the nature of Catholicism, "with its appeal to papal authority."
In 'The Prevention of Literature'  he argued that there was, and had been for some time, a need to defend "the freedom of intellect...against Conservatives, against Catholics...against Communists."
However, like Atwood, Orwell's key satirical target is "the use of religion as an excuse for one set of people to impose their wills on others."
One definition of 'totalitarianism' is "that it is the secularisation of religious aspirations, the attempt to create a Heaven on Earth."
Indeed there are a number of religious allusions within the novel's descriptions of totalitarianism.
Central to both The Handmaid's Tale and Nineteen Eighty-Four is the restriction of individual freedom, an idea present in More's Utopia, but which, in the modern world, seems a more dystopic convention.
This oppression is conducted in Atwood's novel, through a perverted interpretation of biblical texts, and thus disturbingly justified through God.
On the other hand, Orwell saw that in his world, "replacing worship of God by worship of Man had been disastrous."
This is translated into the world of '1984' where God is replaced by the more sinister, omniscient Big Brother.
One woman refers to him as "My Saviour![...
]uttering a prayer" for the dictator, "black-haired, black-moustachio'd, full of power and mysterious calm, and so vast that it almost filled up the screen."
Further into the novel we see this idea translated through O'Brien who Pimlott describes as "an intellectual construct: not a flesh-and-blood human being at all, but the ultimate black image of totalitarianism."
One aspect of the novel that I consider as one of the most disturbing is the sadistic reasoning behind the creation of this society which seems to survive on "an equilibrium of suffering".
The ideology of the Republic of Gilead has, at least, the justification - although a dubious one - of the need to procreate.
However, the doctrine of 'the Party' in Oceania, named 'Insoc', is frighteningly aimless.
O'Brien explains this to Winston: Everything about the society seems to have little or no real justification: "The object of persecution is persecution.
The object of torture is torture.
The object of power is power."
O'Brien optimises this in one sentence when he tells Winston "Power is not a means, it is an end."
The dystopic societies of both The Handmaid's Tale and Nineteen Eighty-Four reveal how rhetoric interpretation can be used as a means of control.
Aristotle defines the art as "the faculty of observing in any given case the available means of persuasion."
He continues: Orwell himself suggested that "Language [...] is a proxy for power [...] those in power use language to disseminate truth selectively through a process of representation and concealment."
Orwell's 'Newspeak' is much like the language used in Gilead, in which the true meanings of words are reversed in an "effort to restructure" and control the way people perceive their world.
In Nineteen Eighty-Four Newspeak is "a kind of anti-language whose vocabulary will diminish year after year, because the ultimate point of orthodoxy is unconsciousness."
During the Reformation, a key point of debate was that of translation.
"To the early reformers, the Bible was a central part of religion hidden from the people in the Occult language of the church, Latin."
Offred describes the Bible as "an incendiary device: who knows what we'd make of it, if we ever got our hands on it?
We can be read to from it, by him, but we cannot read it."
This "Controlled access [...] reinforces the Handmaids' enslavement."
Offred recalls one lunchtime during her time at the Rachel and Leah Re-education Centre when the Handmaids heard the Aunts "drilling into their charges" a recording of the Gileadean account of Jesus' words at the Sermon of the Mount: Offred's reflection is illustrative of the manipulation of the Bible in order to suppress individual freedom.
In Moses and Monotheism Freud suggests that what he calls 'biblical tradition' is consequent of "two opposing desires among redactors: to keep a sacred text piously unchanged regardless of inconsistencies, and to transform the text according to present needs."
"The distortion of a text", he writes, "is not unlike murder".
This practice, of course, provides the central point of power in the world of '1984'.
The purpose of 'Newspeak' and the 'Ministry of Truth' where Winston works is to alter language and history continuously in order to justify political actions and thus maintain ultimate control.
Freud proposes that "The difficulty lies not in the execution of the deed but in the doing away with the traces."
Indeed, one of several disturbing slogans of the Party is "Who controls the past controls the future: who controls the present controls the past".
O'Brien clarifies this: "We, the Party, control all records, and we control all memories.
Then we control the past, do we not?"
Indeed, McMahon suggests that "As long as the powerful side in this conflict continues to exercise control over the present, it will conceal the history of the "other" as a means of perpetuating its power into the future."
Similarly, in the Republic of Gilead, biblical images are manipulated to justify and legitimate the measures taken by the authorities to maintain control.
Jesus's words in Matthew 18:8, "If your hand or your foot causes you to sin, cut it off and throw it away. "
are taken literally when the Gileadean authorities sever the hand of a person as punishment for committing a third offence of reading.
The Handmaid's Tale indeed contains a number of episodes which involve "body mutilation, dismemberment, and shockingly horrific death."
Daniels and Bowen suggest that "Mandatory group leisure" reinforce the Handmaid's slave-like "status as portrayed in the rituals of Birth Days and Salvagings."
The bloodthirsty spectacle of the Salvagings is similar to the encouraged attendance at public hangings in Nineteen Eighty-Four, an activity that is described as a "popular spectacle".
In both novels members of society are reminded what the consequences of disobedience are and encouraged to scorn alleged dissenters.
The use of the word 'salvage' is, of course, another example of the reversal of meanings.
This is further emphasised in Offred's description of the 'Particution', "a heinous game in which the Handmaid's must participate or else be perceived as dissenters themselves."
Signalled to start by a whistle, the Handmaid's are permitted to do anything to a selected convict until a second whistle is blown.
I would also suggest that Atwood is exploring again the ways in which language is used by authorities to legitmate their social practices.
By removing the 'l', we get what is perhaps a more accurate description of the ritual, 'savaging'.
This episode stands out since Offred's commentary suggests that this ritual is without Scriptural support when she describes the "small red velvet" cushions provided for the Handmaids to kneel upon.
Although the act of kneeling might suggest an element of religious worship the cushions have "nothing written on them, not even Faith".
Many elements of Gilead are referred to through biblical allusions.
For example, "Milk and Honey", the grocery store, is drawn from "the land flowing with milk and honey" which is used a number of times in Old Testament descriptions of the Promised Land.
One of the stores visited by Offred is a former lingerie store, now named 'Soul Scrolls'.
"Ordering prayers from Soul Scrolls", Offred explains, "is supposed to be a sign of piety and faithfulness to the regime."
It is possible to relate this element of Gileadean society to the sale of prayers and indulgences by Catholic priests, one of the practices reformers of the sixteenth century wished to abolish.
Unlike the Commander, who is permitted to read directly from the Bible, the Handmaids and Wives are forced to, in a sense, purchase their prayers.
The way the prayers of women have to be mediated not only relates to middle age Catholic practices, but reinforces the patriarchal structure of Gilead.
This, too, is reminiscent of the God - man - woman hierarchy of the Old Testament.
Other, more sinister elements of Gileadean society can also be seen to draw upon scriptural sources.
In Chapter 15 the Commander concludes the prayer session with the following passage taken from 2 Chronicles 7:9: Kreitzer cites this as the likely biblical source for the concept of the Gileadean secret police, the 'Eyes'.
Thus, the Bible is used "as a means of emphasizing the Republic's all - pervasiveness...every aspect of life is watched, regulated and controlled."
The key difference between the two novels lies in the fate of the protagonists.
Orwell's Winston Smith fails to escape and eventually dies having learnt to love Big Brother.
The narrative of Offred on the other hand offers a tale of survival.
Her narrative itself is defiant against Gilead's order of female submissiveness.
The mosaic of other Handmaid's stories not only provides a "sad subtext to Offred's survival narrative" but allows Offred to pass moral judgement on Gileadean social practices through her reflection.
However, an idea that I find perhaps more poignant is that she is speaking defiantly against the overwhelmingly masculine narrative of the Old Testament itself; against what Ostriker refers to as a "startling pattern" of silencing women within the Bible; and ultimately against "the obsessively told and re-told moment of transition from a world in which women were humanly and socially powerful because divinity was in part female, to a world in which that divinity and power were repressed."
Alicia Suskin Ostriker argues that the Bible "conceals, but reveals as it conceals, a collective repression of the female."
She proposes that "the biblical story of monotheism and covenant" in the Old Testament is "a cover-up; that when we lift the cover we find quite another story...of erased female power."
Phyllis Trible defines feminism as "a critique of culture and faith in light of misogyny."
The Handmaid's Tale essentially reveals the way in which "women are repressed and silenced" by the patriarchal authorities in Gilead.
In the aforementioned distortion of the Beautitudes, the addition of "Blessed are the silent" highlights this key theme.
It is possible that this is more than a criticism of the Bible itself but of the "canonizing process", which Ostriker also argues has "throughout history rested, not accidentally but essentially, in the silencing of women."
Feminist hermeneutics have been employed to both document "the case against women", highlighting the "inferiority, subordination, and abuse of the female in ancient Israel", and uphold "forgotten texts" and reinterpret "familiar ones to shape a remnant theology that challenges the sexism of scripture."
In Trible's discussion of the story of Sarah and Hagar, I found a number of key ideas that parallel those in Atwood's novel.
In the final section of this essay, I will explore further these ideas, highlighting both how women are treated in the Old Testament and the parallels that can be found within The Handmaid's Tale.
In an article published in the North American Review Elizabeth Cady Stanton proposed that the Bible "has been interpreted to favour intemperance, slavery, capital punishment and the subjection of women."
In Atwood's novel, possibly the most explicit example is that of the monthly 'Ceremony'.
Ketterer  suggests that "the description of the ritual coupling between Commander and Handmaid is "modelled directly on the Genesis passage."
In Atwood's novel, the women who become Handmaids are essentially "sexually objectified" in a society where "sterility has become the rule rather than the exception" they are "a politically charged commodity."
"We are two-legged wombs", Offred explains, "that's all: sacred vessels, ambulatory chalices."
During the "grotesque impregnation ceremony" the parallels between the stories of Rachel, Bilhah and Jacob, or Sarah, Hagar and Abraham, become abundantly clear.
The Commander assumes the role of the patriarch, the wife the role of the barren woman who offers her slave woman, or Handmaid, to her husband in the hope that "she shall bear upon my knees, that I may also have children by her."
Indeed, what is the most disturbing element of this episode is the justification provided by the Bible.
Rachel's words are taken literally, as Offred explains: Thus, it seems that in order to aid patriarchal power in the Republic of Gilead, a "literal interpretation of the Bible is used in the language of Gilead which is based upon the phallocentric word made flesh."
Trible assesses the circular structure of Hagar's story in one of the biblical accounts of surrogate motherhood, describing it as "a circle of bondage."
Like the Handmaids in Atwood's novel are transferred between households, Hagar, Trible suggests, is constantly "moving from bondage to flight to bondage."
In this sense, both the biblical and Gileadean Handmaids have "no choice regarding the treatment of their bodies" and ultimately "no control over their lives."
The parallels between Handmaid and the biblical surrogate maid extend further to their relationship with the wives, and furthermore in their ultimate undermining within a male dominated narrative.
"Strife between barren and fertile wives is a typical motif in scripture."
The maid is presented as a powerless object, with the power residing in the subject of the action, represented through the figure of the barren wife.
Trible describes the maid as "an instrument, not a person" that "enhances the mistress".
This is echoed in The Handmaid's Tale through Offred's relationship with Serena Joy, who describes it as "a business transaction."
Later in the novel, when questioned by Serena "Nothing yet?
", Offred's commentary gives further evidence of this: The absence of conversation is also paralleled in the biblical narratives, "continuing to separate the females."
This passage also suggests that the situation enforced by the patriarchal authorities in Gilead is not entirely comfortable for the wives either.
This of course, differs from the biblical narratives in which the wives themselves, albeit driven by jealousy and humiliation, suggest the surrogacy themselves.
Offred's narrative on the other hand acknowledges the difficult situation of the wives, and indeed Serena Joy bitterly suggests that in fact the situation could have been worse: Hence, it seems that it is not only the Handmaids who suffer from the patriarchal oppression of Gilead, but women in general.
A key theme in both the biblical surrogacy narratives and The Handmaid's Tale is they way in which suffering constantly appears to undercut hope.
Ostriker argues that "Biblical patriarchy...figuratively encodes within its text the repeated acts of literal murder and oppression necessary for its triumph."
In Atwood's novel The Historical Notes essentially undermine Offred, as does the narrated ending to Hagar's story which ultimately "silences her voice."
Following an ambivalent ending, the notes seem to suggest that Offred does succeed in escaping, although essentially her fate remains unknown to us.
Hagar disappears from her own narrative following her banishment, which Trible suggests "is not liberation, nevertheless, it moves her to personhood."
Similarly, the act of narrating her own story is not only defiant itself, it allows Offred to find her identity, a luxury denied to her within the Gileadean regime.
Daniels and Bowen propose that "Atwood's Handmaids can be said to be in a state of painful self-awareness of their social conditioning"; that "Throughout the novel [Offred] continues an inward battle to retain her sense of self": "I want to be valued, in ways that I am not; I want to be more than valuable.
I repeat my former name, remind myself of what I once could do, how others saw me."
Early in the novel, Offred reflects upon her narrative: "I would like to believe this is a story I'm telling.
[...] If it's a story I'm telling, then I have control over the ending."
However, as Offred herself also recognises, "It isn't a story I'm telling", she does not control her fate, and furthermore, the end of her narrative is taken from her control.
The Historical Notes take us into a future beyond that of Gilead, to a discussion amongst scholars who have discovered the recordings of Offred's narrative.
The documented academic argument over the validity of the story is compared by Jasper to the way in which "biblical scholarship argues over the truth of the Bible itself."
This section of the novel not only undermines Offred's own heroic plight, but also, as Jasper suggests, highlights the ways in which "Our very cleverness blinds us to the human cry of the narrative".
It seems Atwood could be drawing parallels with the Bible to form a critique of how "its searing, human stories of love, pain, heroism and loss are often subsumed under the clever historical niceties of academic debate."
However, what Jasper fails to acknowledge, is that the story lost, here, is that of a woman.
Ostriker notes that "biblical interpretation until the present moment has been virtually exclusively the prerogative of the males" and it has thus been an aim of feminism to "recover a neglected history" of the women 'buried' within biblical narratives.
Indeed, Offred's story is undermined essentially through what I would describe as a patronising sexist discussion given by the male Professor Piexieto.
In Nineteen Eighty-Four Winston's narrative is also, in a sense, undermined through a destruction of identity, although during his own lifetime.
Stripped of his true self, we are left with an image of him as "the long-hoped-for bullet was entering his brain" and "Two gin-scented tears trickled down the sides of his nose.
But it was all right, everything was all right, the struggle was finished.
He had won victory over himself.
He loved Big Brother."
Whilst the ending of Offred's narrative allows her to begin to re-build her identity, Winston is forced to accept his defeat in a world where 'war is peace', 'freedom is slavery', and 'ignorance is strength'.
In both novels the dystopic totalitarian regimes purport ways of living in a disturbingly collective manner.
In the world of '1984' the distortion of reality by the omnipresent Big Brother creates a society absent of purpose and without the freedom of individual choice.
In The Handmaid's Tale the abundance of biblical imagery, and allusion to various narratives of the Bible generates a harrowing image of a futuristic patriarchal society, which legitimates the humiliation and enslavement of women with literal interpretations of scripture.
However, what I would also argue as a key idea in both novels, and also feminist hermeneutics, is the importance of the preservation of the individual self within the larger, collective body.
In particular, feminist readings of the Bible, and indeed Atwood's novel itself, demonstrate that the voices of these individuals should not, and will not, remain silenced.
In George Byron's Manfred a Dramatic Poem the Abbot remarks: The notion of 'chaos' influencing the 'mind' and 'passions' is a direct reflection upon issues of the self, the category of the individual, which permeated the literature and philosophy of the nineteenth century, due to the economic, religious and social upheavals caused by advances in science, the debate on slavery and industrialisation, all of which disrupted the class structure.
Critic David Punter concurs that " it is conventional, and reasonable, to say that the society which generated and read Gothic fiction was one which was becoming aware of injustice in a variety of different areas ... there was a dawning consciousness of inequality."
These external conflicts were internalised by the writers and poets of the genre and immortalised through literary tropes, symbols and figures in Gothic writing.
Therefore, to explore the category of subjectivity, which depends "on an individual's perception for its existence," it is beneficial to analyse descriptions of sensibility, landscape, architecture and liminality within my selected texts.
I will examine elements of George Byron's Manfred, Samuel Coleridge's The Rime of the Ancient Mariner, John Keat's The Eve of St Agnes and Ann Radcliffe's The Mysteries of Udolpho.
By entitling the poem  Manfred, Byron immediately establishes Manfred as a liminal, renegade figure.
A strong, stark entity unto his own, whose unconventional codes of behaviour separate and define him as an overreacher and a liminal figure.
Based strongly upon J.W.
Von Goethe's Faust 1540 who was frustrated with 'wretched theology,' and reminiscent of Christopher Marlowe's Dr Faustus,1616 Manfred too is uncontented with 'philosophy and science' so he employs 'written charm' to call up the seven spirits.
Whilst Faust desired 'certainty,' Manfred desires 'self oblivion,' to lose his subjectivity, in order to return to a place of innocence and surety.
I recall Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, as we learn that Manfred's 'promethean spark' has led him to pass 'the nights of years in science untaught."
Only the death of his sister, Astarte, has brought on Manfred's agnorisis, which consequently has caused his sense of self to deteriorate into an extremely negative self-image.
This notion of negativity is adopted and used by Keat's in his idea of 'negative capability,' which he puts to full use in Eve of St Agnes.
In a letter to his brothers in 1817, Keats argues that the poets of the day are "incapable of remaining content with half knowledge."
He wished to implement "negative capability, that is when man is capable of making all disagreeableness evaporate, without any irritable reaching after fact and reason."
He desired the reader to immerse the self in what is perceived, and lose oneself in a dream like reverie, instead of constantly analysing the text.
The ambiguity of the passage depicting Madeline's rape by Porphyro highlights the liminality that exists between consummation and purity.
The reader is left in doubt as to whether the rape actually takes place because Byron's description is so poetical: This liminality between the dream world and reality leaves the reader without 'fact and reason' and they are forced to remain 'content with half knowledge.'
Liminality also encompasses notions of religion and sexuality.
Like Matthew Lewis' creation, Ambrosio, in The Monk, Manfred is continually within the liminal sphere of redemption and damnation.
The Abbot reminds Manfred twice that 'penitence and pardon; with thyself/The choice of such remains."
He urges Manfred to 'reconcile thee/With the true Church."
However, Manfred's hubris causes him 'not  choose a mortal to be [his] mediator."
His actions are sacrilegious and transgressive.
Neither Orthodox Christianity  nor the spirit world can control Manfred.
His agency is overpowering till the last.
He is never terrified by the evil spirits he calls up, and proudly declares in his final speech ' I have not been thy dupe nor am thy prey-/But was my own destroyer."
On the other hand Coleridge's inclusion of the Latin epigraph 'facile credo, plures esse Naturas invisibiles quam visibiles in rerum universitate - I can easily believe that there are more invisible than visible beings in the universe' suggests an acknowledgment of a higher power in The Rime of the Ancient Mariner.
Indeed the Mariner himself and the curse he brings upon the ship, when it is stranded 'as a painted ship/Upon a painted ocean,' is reminiscent of the tale of Jonah from the Bible.
Coleridge and Wordsworth were renowned for their pastoral idyllic descriptions; the incongruent killing of the albatross therefore is highly significant, because not only has it often been compared to the crucifixion of Christ, but the bird also appears domesticated and poses no threat when it came 'everyday, for food or play."
The murder appears entirely arbitrary, unprovoked and the Mariner displays no signs of repentance.
This produces an ambiguous moment of transgression, which is complicated further by the arbitrary judgement of the other sailors.
Similarly, when the Mariner encounters the 'water-snakes' he twice remarks 'I blessed them unaware.'
These actions suggest the Mariner is not in control of either virtuous or immoral events, this problematises the Mariner's agency and subjectivity.
All these factors conspire to confuse the reader's moral compass.
In her Mysteries of Udolpho, Radcliffe appears to be writing a bildungsroman, depicting Emily's process of maturation from childhood and innocence, through to adulthood and experience.
However, Emily eventually returns home to 'La Vallee' creating a circular structure in the novel.
This is an uncharacteristic ending for a bildungsroman and therefore compromises the novel's status as a bildungsroman and places it in a liminal sphere.
When faced with Valanacourt's sexual advances Emily is in continual conflict with her natural reactions and having to display the desired qualities of sensibility, typical in a Rousseauian female figure: She is forced into a liminal state by the constraints of society.
Manfred's purpose for calling the seven spirits is in request that they 'wake [from the] dead' his sister Astarte, whom he 'loved and 'destroyed.'
His confession that 'I have shed/Blood, but not hers, and yet her blood was shed' is deliberately obtuse and carries sexual undertones, which might assign the 'blood' as hymnal blood.
I am persuaded to think Byron's own incestuous relationship with his sister, and the guilt associated, influenced this pivotal moment of the prose.
Manfred never reveals the implications of his confession.
The bathetic ending does not provide any conclusive certainty for the reader, so ironically it is them who are left stranded in a liminal sphere instead.
Sexuality is introduced in The Rime of the Ancient Mariner through the bride, who is 'red as a rose' who may be compared with Madeline, who is also portrayed as a 'rose' in Keat's Eve of St Agnes.
Madeline is denied agency through her unconscious state, as she lies 'trembling in her soft and chilly nest,' we recall Tess in Tess of the D'Urbervilles prior to her rape, by Alex, in the forest.
A carnality and sensuousness pervades the entire poem.
The 'sculptured dead' that adorn the cold castle filled with 'shadows haunting' contrasts sharply with Madeline's sensuous dreams of 'fairy fancy."
The 'amorous cavalier' Porphyro and his chivalric romantic status is soon replaced by sinister scopophilia.
He skulks in a 'closet' and provides temptations of ' candied apple...and dates, in argosy transferred/ From Fez' to trick Madeline into believing reality to be a dream.
By seeming to enter into Madeline's dream world, Porphyro is essentially invading her sacred sphere of chastity and propriety, 'free from mortal taint."
His actions transgress the liminality between dream and reality, whilst also carrying threatening sexual undertones.
I propose that the boundary between reality and perception of reality is problematised for the reader, by its existence depending entirely on a character's level of subjectivity.
Radcliffe highlights from the beginning that her heroine, Emily in The Mysteries of Udolpho, is possessed of ' a degree of susceptibility too exquisite to admit lasting peace."
Despite her father's instructions to not gratify her sensibilities and to learn 'the duty of self-command,' Udolpho is loaded with scenes of Emily succumbing to her emotions.
She often 'sunk...under the pressure of her sorrow,' she 'could only listen and weep' to her father's dying words and after his death 'she [freely] indulged her tears."
According to David Punter "it is this quivering sensitivity which continually prostrates her before spectres of her own imagining."
Effectually Emily manifests her own terror.
This is evident on her meeting with Count Morano, whom 'she looked upon...with horror, but apart from him, a conviction, if such that may be called, which arises from no proof, and which she knew not how to account for, seized her mind.'
Punter suggests "it is never clear to what extent those circumstances are genuinely imposed on the characters by outside forces and to what extent they are projections of paranoia and vulnerability."
In the Eve of St Agnes Madeline does demonstrate some of the sensibilities attributed to a Romantic heroine.
On being awakened by Porphyro she regrets the 'painful change, that nigh expelled/ The blisses of her dream so pure and deep/At which fair Madeline began to weep."
However, she often lacks agency and is given no chance to make her own decision about the elopement, she only 'hurried at his [Porphyro's] words.'
Analysis of sensibility inevitably leads to an awareness of landscape and its potential for describing the external world, whilst also evoking sublime emotions that reflect interiority.
As Kilgour highlights "nature is never fully detached form the human mind, which is itself a veil covering it."
Landscape carries huge potential for highlighting the essence of subjectivity in Gothic literature, whilst also providing access for exploration of liminality.
Manfred employs pathetic fallacy as a means to describe his lonely nature: Fred Botting suggests "wild, natural images, internalised as a sign of tormented consciousness, give force to the sense of individual dislocation."
Manfred, however, does find comfort and 'sweet solitude' in nature and is able to access the sublime and 'spirit of [a] place."
On the other hand, nature assumes it own agency and is personified when Manfred appeals to the 'grey haired ... blasted pines' and 'avalanches' to come and crush him.
The hostile 'land of ice' depicted in The Rime of the Ancient Mariner lacks identity unlike the classic Gothic castle.
However, it is the classic setting for Gothic horror, 'storms' and 'water snakes' and 'slimy things' infest the sea.
The ship's journey south leads to foreign lands, ungoverned by moral rules and allowing existing ones to be easily transgressed.
This perhaps explains why the murder of the albatross is a bathetic moment, instead of a terrifying or shocking one.
However, the revelations of the Mariner may just be dreams, subconscious acts of rebellion against convention, as David Punter recalls: Alternatively, landscape carries positive connotations for Emily in The Mysteries of Udolpho.
Radcliffe fills the pages with lucid, poetical depictions of sublime landscape: I believe Radcliffe's numerous descriptions of nature are stimulated by a nostalgia that was being threatened by the onset of industrialisation, suggested by St Auberts fondness for the 'oak' that resides on their property at La Vallee.
Architecture carries "talismanic importance" in Gothic writing and holds huge potential for highlighting subjectivity.
The sensuous descriptions of the landscape painted by Radcliffe in Udolpho contrast sharply with the architecture she designs and describes.
Emily views castle Udolpho as 'silent, lonely, and sublime, it seemed to stand the sovereign of the scene, and to frown defiance on all, who dared to invade its solitary reign."
Here Radcliffe uses the castle of Udolpho as a metaphor of the mind, particularly Montoni's.
Ironically, the castle adorned with 'the sculptured dead' and the 'scutcheon [that] blushed with blood of queens and kings' in Eve of St Agnes is according to Mark Sandy: Allowing them to escape to an ideal existence.
However, this is undercut by the deaths related at the end of the poem, suggesting they have only eloped into a troubled 'storm' of tragic reality.
In conclusion, analysis of these categories; liminality, sensibility, landscape and architecture have revealed that a sense of agency or subjectivity depends upon reflection within the character.
This belief blurs the boundaries between subject and object, so that all these tropes act as distorted mirrors onto which a character can impress their perceptions of reality.
There is a continual dialectic relationship between self and object, in an attempt to confirm their own identity or sense of self.
#
On a first observation of Song: On Her Loving Two Equally the reader is aware that the poem is set out visually and rhythmically in a song-like format further signified by the indication in the title; 'Song'.
Each of the three stanzas is of equal length and metre, the first five lines of each stanza working in iambic tetrameter followed by the final line of iambic pentameter, reverting to the traditional metre in Shakespeare's love sonnets.
Perhaps this steady lyrical rhythm represents the steady heartbeat of the speaker emphasised by the masculine single rhyme scheme, thus linking to the theme of love presented throughout the poem.
Supporting this idea is that as the poem draws to a climax in the third stanza, the natural flow of the final lines are broken up by punctuation more often than elsewhere in the 'song' and an exclamation of 'But which, O Cupid, wilt thou take?'
possibly conveying the increasing intensity of feelings of the speaker and confusion in her heart, showing how deeply the situation affects her.
The rhyme scheme differs in the middle stanza from the first and final as the pattern changes from aabbcc to  ababcc.
As the final syllable in each line is stressed it creates a greater impact and more resounding effect encouraging the awareness of the seriousness of the poem.
Behn uses mainly imperfect rhyme; 'god', 'blood' and even eye pararhyme; 'prove' and 'love'.
The poet could be using these fairly unsatisfying techniques to signify the complexity and irregularity of emotions and deep feelings, the chaos of love.
The lack of perfect rhyme also maybe represents her indecisiveness about which lover to choose and the unorganised thoughts in her mind.
Throughout this piece of literature can be seen a specific lexical cluster containing such words as 'heart', 'love', 'passion', 'flow', 'blood' and 'Cupid' working to conjure up a strong image in the reader's mind.
This collection of words appear to link to the natural world; 'flow', evoking an image of a river and 'blood', a vital part of the human body reminding the reader of the naturalness of love and emotions.
The particular image of 'Cupid' acts as a metaphor for the speaker's own decision on which lover to choose and relates to the traditional views on love as this Roman god is brought into the picture.
Language is a key feature in the 'song' and many types are used for dramatic effect.
The archaic language used; 'wilt thou', ''twixt', creates a sense of tradition and importance enhancing the significance of the poem's meaning and the gravity of 'love'.
Behn also occasionally uses onomatopoeia in the poem such as the repeated word 'sigh' to enable the reader to obtain a clearer insight into the speakers mind and create a sharper picture through the detail of sound.
The 'fever in' her 'blood' is personified and becomes 'restless'.
This emphasises the torturous quality of her feelings and enhances the physical passion she feels in the situation.
The idea of possessive love is conveyed powerfully it seems by the use of first person and the consistent use of 'my' especially whilst referring to 'Damon' and 'Alexis'.
She loves both and cannot live with one without the other, therefore attaches herself to the 'two' and is afraid to let one go.
There are many formal features in Song: On Her Loving Two Equally that emphasise the ideas and enhance the poem's quality to make the piece effective to the reader.
The term 'meaning' cannot clearly be defined, because, as Joseph Devito explains, it is something that is 'in people' not 'in words'.
However, that is not to say that text is inert, that it is incapable of providing a means from which to create a sense of meaning within an individual.
By allowing a fictitious environment to inhabit our realm of conscious thought, we are able to comprehend a perspective and sense of reality outside of our own.
Therefore it can be seen that an individual's engagement with a text can be more of a subjective experience than an objective one.
It is not possible to understand another individual if one cannot at the same time identify oneself with them.
If a reader associates their self with a character in a work of fiction whom it is believed the messages or ideas of the text are being conveyed to, they in return may use the insight gained from the text to put into perspective their own personal context, hence a story is developed far beyond what is merely implied in the text.
This story is always different because the context that surrounds an individual is always dynamic, active and as Mercer  mentions 'created anew in every interaction between speaker and listener'.
Devito  explains that 'as you change, you also change the meanings you created out of past messages'.
What can be learnt from this statement is that meaning is always in a process of evolvement, continually transforming and therefore is a concept that is always in the process of being understood.
This essay will examine the ways in which meaning is mediated through discursive dialogues in Joseph Conrad's Heart of Darkness, and directors Andy and Larry Wachowski's 1999 movie The Matrix.
An author's text can draw a reader into a world outside of the one in which they are familiar with.
An individual is able to perceive a different reality to the one in which they previously took for granted as a stable, fixed conceptual mode of being.
One method of achieving this is through using the text to provoke a response in the reader.
An example of this is seen in the following passage from Heart of Darkness, where the story's protagonist, Marlow, explains to his listeners of the feelings that were incurred by the sounds he heard as he ascended upstream into the Congo: What is immediately apparent in this passage is the direct address that Marlow makes to his audience with the repetition of the word 'you'.
In the story, the 'you' refers to the people aboard a ship that are listening to Marlow recount a voyage undertaken in his younger days.
But it can also be seen as a direct address to the reader.
Taking this into consideration, we find that the text has an active role.
The first theorist to explore the field of pragmatics, J.L Austin, distinguished between two different types of utterance, namely that of constatives, which are descriptive statements, and performatives, which are utterances that perform actions.
Hence, if the reader takes the utterance 'you' to be referring to them, the text is performative, it is performing an action in that it is having an active affect on the reader, who would consider not the contextual situation of the fictional narrator, but their own personal life.
I.A.
Richards  points out that 'the personal situation of the reader inevitably  affects his reading'.
For the reader to interpret their own sense of meaning from this passage they would focus on the indirect and symbolic form of the description given, because they would not be able to experience the sounds of the Congo from the text alone.
Barron  states that indirect speech acts occur where the speaker 'means more than what he says', and this is evident in the line ' - you so remote from the night of first ages, could comprehend'.
This appears to be use of indirect speech because of the vague description 'night of the first ages'.
In the story it might imply that Marlow's audience are literally far away from the Congo of Africa, but taken as an abstract address to the reader, one may consider that they we as civilised human beings are widely separated from the feelings and emotions felt in a primitive state.
Mercer  states that conversations are 'not necessarily made up of physical objects and events around the speaker'.
The implications Mercer's statement conveys the notion that readers do not have to relate their own sense of meaning to a literal description in the text.
They need not even equate meaning to any ideas or messages Conrad could have originally intended to convey.
What is important in order for the text to stimulate any kind of response in the reader is that it merely presents an environment, event or perspective to which the reader can reflect their own experience and point of view against.
In this sense, the author's text is made irrelevant to the process of meaning making.
To further the notion that the mediation of meaning can be created through textual interaction, it is necessary to compare it to another dialogue.
In The Matrix, the protagonist of the story, Neo, meets with a character named Morpheus for the first time, in a scene where Morpheus explains that Neo has been living in a projected reality: This passage parallels the last one since the viewer is directly addressed with indirect forms of language.
Again the use of 'you' as an address is present, with the vague descriptive language provoking in the viewer a sense of abstract meaning that could readily be applied to their individual life.
In the movie, Morpheus is literally referring to the fact that Neo's sense of reality is actually an illusion perpetuated a computer generated reality known as 'The Matrix', which is what is 'wrong with the world'.
However, because the viewer is seemingly directly addressed, a symbolic reading inevitably ensues, leading the viewer to question their own sense of reality.
Just as Heart of Darkness could invoke uneasy sensations in the reader about their natural emotions being repressed by civilisation, so to can Morpheus's dialogue be seen to provoke the same sense of discomfort in the viewer in regards to their accustomed perception of the world.
To put this into perspective, post-Jungian Christopher Hauke  explains that 'we do not live in a world of 'presentations' but one of re-presentations that are further re-presented in linguistic forms; we are doubly alienated from experience'.
Within the context of the movie, Neo is shown that a computer program constructs the world that he believes to be living in, and the real world is actually many years into the future.
What this can implicitly invoke in the reader is a sense that technology and civilisation have replaced the natural environment, which in turn seem so commonplace that the urban landscape itself feels like a natural environment.
This can also provoke the viewer into questioning their previous natural adaptation to the current urban environment, which as Morpheus states 'You felt it your entire life'.
The viewer could therefore examine this 'feeling', or previous perception of reality, by reconsidering the ways in which certain objects can have specific meanings attached to them because of what they subjectively represent and unconsciously evoke feelings of.
In this way, the viewer's 'splinter' can be removed and their meanings given to objects and feelings can be revaluated.
As we have seen, the reader or viewer of a text can be made aware that their unconscious mind can have an extensive influence over that which they perceive.
This new, critical perspective on one's surroundings and the meanings that objects invoke leads to the focus on the readers themselves.
Both Heart of Darkness and The Matrix focus on journeys, where the reader may, if viewed within a symbolic context, discover truths about themselves.
To do this, a text needs to make the reader aware that just as the world as they experience it is only a product of individual interpretation, so may the concept of the self.
The Matrix explains this by way of psychic representation in the scene where Neo meets a character named 'the Oracle': Morpheus, in Greek mythology, is the god of dreams.
An oracle is one who can divine the future, and the rearranging of the word 'Neo' can spell 'one'.
Therefore the viewer can assume that the Oracle is addressing them when she says 'Neo', but what she is addressing is less clear.
If the many characters Neo is helped by along his journey are constructs of the psyche, then it is possible that they represent aspects of the self.
It is likely that Morpheus represents faith, which is a quality associated with dreams in the emotional sense of the word.
Hauke  states that the other within each individual represents 'lost parts of the personality felt to be foreign and other to the ego but which are calling for inclusion and to be in dialogue with the ego'.
The effect that this would have when comprehended by the viewer is that they question the earthly values that they possess, such as faith and love, to see how much of these natural qualities have been retained in their ego, or whether they have been repressed into their unconscious.
Lane, Mengham and Tew  state that 'the construction of civic identity involves the repression of certain aspects of the self'.
This view implies that it is civilization that causes this fragmented sense of self, which an individual can only recover through knowing what parts of the self have been lost.
What this sense of incompleteness in the viewer can reveal about the meaning of the self can be explained in religious terms.
Because all religions are generally based on the same basic principles, that of seeking certain truths about oneself and the world around us, it is possible that a religious reading of this passage can reveal meaning about the self.
The oracle mentions that Morpheus will 'sacrifice his life to save yours'.
In many religions, sacrifices, human or other, are often offered to Gods as a form of praise and worship.
Grotstein  believes that 'the search for God is but another way - in part, albeit - to search for his/her own Unconscious'.
This would imply, in the post-Lacan sense that the continual search for meaning, which many groups of people have projected into the idolisation of a form of deity, is merely a sense of something missing that can be rediscovered.
What this can induce in the viewer is the idea that they should release the natural emotions within themselves that have been repressed by society and embrace feelings toward an unconscious mode of being in order to regain a sense of self.
Therefore any projections of their own psyche, which may have enveloped a sense of meaning, can be eradicated, so that a state of association with all the previously repressed emotions is experienced and any previous sense of meaning is merely immaterial in light of a fresh outlook.
A religious reading of psychic constructions can also be taken from Heart of Darkness, when Marlow describes Colonial Kurtz's strange ceremonial proceedings: A symbolic reading of this passage would imply that 'Mr Kurtz' is Marlow's projected other, his journey into the Congo being a journey into his inner self to discover his true nature.
The 'unspeakable rights' that are 'offered up' to Kurtz is a seemingly vague passage, which instantly arouses the question of what these rights were.
It is not, however, important to know this within the context of the story because as has been previously discussed, meaning can only be appreciated and interpreted in the light of the reader's own context.
The reader can construct their own sense of what these rights were, whether they were events from their own life that have created their sense of self or any other interpretation of the rights which remain 'unspeakable'.
The question 'do you understand?'
appears to address the reader, but can obviously invoke differing responses within separate individuals.
With this in mind, the question is seemingly unimportant.
The religious analogy imploring the reader to comprehend a sense of self that is separate from the ego seems like the obvious strategy of this passage, but the abstract language leaves the reader free to create their own meanings from the text, which is there merely to incite such thoughts and creative responses.
We have seen how text can invoke responses in the reader to create meanings about themselves and the world around them, but we have not explored any useful purpose for doing so.
The last way in which meaning is mediated that shall be explored is the process of self-realization that can occur when one's perceptions have been reconsidered in light of newly revaluated meanings.
We are able to witness this state of self-realization in the following passage from Heart of Darkness, where Marlow reflects on his journey: Like all of the passages, the use of 'you' addresses not only the character but also the reader, and can therefore be seen as an attempt to convey what it is to have looked back on oneself.
The passage seemingly attempts to explain that self-realization 'comes too late'; therefore not giving advice to the reader but instead showing that text alone cannot create meaning.
In the novel, Kurtz died after glimpsing his true self, yet Marlow only got close.
This is a similar situation to the reader's one since this passage is attempting to explain that it can only shed so much light on the truths represented by the text because the reader, with their own evolving context, must discover truths independently.
The product of this hopefully would be the inciting of the reader's creative imagination, in doing which can transform the text as it perceives into a more personal story, integrating philosophical, psychological, religious or any other frameworks with their own lives to create a sense of meaning.
The Matrix has a similar moment of imaginative incitation in a scene where Morpheus tells Neo that he must find things out for himself: As in the previous passage, there is an emphasis on the fact that it is the viewer who must obtain enlightenment for themselves, and just as Morpheus cannot grant it to Neo, neither can the dialogue spoken here grant it to the viewer.
The dialogue is 'trying to free your mind', but it cannot do it for the viewer.
This is because to do so would be to comprehend reality so as to exclude the dialogue itself.
To be 'free' in modern times one would need to transcend thoughts of being rooted in the twenty four hour day or any other social construct that limits freedom of thought and creates fixed identities.
When you can think outside of yourself, your material being, even though that notion itself is a form of ideological construction, it is possible to examine yourself in the most honest way possible because you would have distanced yourself from your own perspective.
The rejuvenated perspective gained from this newly enlightened state prepares one to meet the world with either the despair of passive hopelessness, or with a revived sense of active dynamism.
In all the ways in which meaning is mediated through discursive dialogues, as has been witnessed in the texts studied, meaning has been seen as less of an objective concept and more a subjectively constructed one, which can influenced by external factors such as literature.
However, meaning is a concept that is always in the process of being understood because the factors that contribute towards the construction of it, such as context, emotions and perspective, are continually in a state of change.
Through the different ways in which text has been shown to mediate meaning, questioning notions of reality and self, it is seemingly the attainment of self-realization that can reveal the ultimate truths in one's life.
The attainment of such a state of mind, however, can only be aroused by text - it is the individual, imaginatively creating their own stories from the text, who are then responsible learn from these truths if any sense of meaning is to be formed.
In this opening quotation George Eliot highlights a crucial theme that pervaded not only her novels but also her private life; the role of the outsider.
Eliot's refusal to attend church with her father between the January and May of 1842, the translation of prominent anti-Christian texts; namely Strauss's Life of Jesus  and Feuerbach's Essence of Christianity , and her relationship with the married George Lewes secured her own status as a religious and social transgressor.
These histories strongly suggest that the characters of her first novel, Adam Bede , would experience similar rejections.
Indeed, the quotation cited demonstrates the perennial ethics of a traditional, provincial community like Hayslope which will not tolerate those characters who do not conform to the tenets and codes of behaviour established in this bucolic pastoral world.
A character's social and moral integrity is established by their adherence to these implicit codes.
Dorothy Van Ghent concurs that there is a "mute recognition by which the community lives...it is a recognition that personal good has communal determinations."
Therefore, to explore the category of the outsider it is beneficial to analyse Eliot's literary methods, the treatment of her characters and the intellectual tropes concerning realism, Darwinism and the religion of humanity.
David Carroll has identified two anomalies that the inhabitants of Hayslope seek to exclude; they are "the reality of sin, suffering and death" and " erotic desire."
Therefore, those characters that introduce these anomalies are considered outsiders.
Accordingly, the reader must also keep in mind that without the existence of typically good characters like; Adam, Seth, Lisbeth and Mr Poyser, their antithesis's, the outsiders; Hetty, Dinah and Arthur would not exist, as Eliot highlights all 'men's lives are as thoroughly blended with each other as the air they breathe.'
First then, I will discuss briefly those characters considered insiders.
Eliot portrays her protagonist, Adam Bede, as a 'Saxon'  who embodies the traditional values and beliefs of bucolic Hayslope.
His defining characteristics of strength and intellect establish him as no 'ordinary character among workmen' and the moral yardstick by which all other characters are measured by the reader.
Indeed, the religious significance of his name can easily be assimilated to Adam in the Garden of Eden.
Accordingly, his employment as a carpenter is reminiscent of Jesus' vocation.
Similarly, his brother Seth is an insider due to his obliging ' benignant' behaviour, but Eliot is keen to highlight his inferiority in comparison to the muscular Adam by denoting the prominent 'coronal arch', which according to the science of phrenology that was introduced to Eliot by George Combes, is a sign of weakness in a man.
Their mother, Lisbeth, at times alienates the readers through her constant fretting but this is overwhelmed by her enduring 'mother's voice,' which links her to nature and therefore the community.
Accordingly, her constant residence inside the family home consolidates her status as an insider, as she never strays outside to compromise or transgress her allotted social role.
Eliot juxtaposes Adam's moral integrity with Arthur's fickle nature to establish his liminal status.
Indeed, the religious connotations implicit in Adam's name suggest that Arthur's betrayal of Adam is equivalent to Judas' betrayal of Jesus.
This suggestion is supported by Arthur's 'absence' at Thias Bede's funeral.
In his affair with Hetty, Arthur is forced to meet her, neither on a farm nor on an estate, but on 'the Chase,' a liminal place where they are free to explore their erotic desires without the condemnation of the community.
Indeed, Arthur must undergo a symbolic death during his fight with Adam in the grove, to emerge understood but not forgiven by the community, for Eliot makes it clear to the reader that 'our deeds determine us as much as we determine our deeds,' suggesting that Arthur is responsible for his actions and no malign fate is at work.
Valentine Cunningham agrees that 'Eliot was doubtful that destiny was determined entirely by character."
Here Eliot is seen to be exploring contemporary thoughts on Determinism within her text.
Indeed, Adam Bede was published the same year as Charles Darwin's influential bestseller The Origin of the Species.
In contrast to the young Arthur, Mr Irwine is constructed as an essentially good clergyman with a moral character.
However, not only does his prosperity separate him from the rest of the farming community but also his devotion to his bigoted mother, Mrs Irwine.
On surveying Hetty at the spring games, she declares 'what a pity such a beauty as that should be thrown away among the farmers."
She physically detaches herself from the community by refusing to join the festivities.
Mr Irwine's sisters, Miss Kate and Miss Anne, remain at the epistemological petticoats of the novel as 'superfluous existences; inartistic figures crowding the canvas of life."
The community ignores them because their sickliness is incongruent with the healthy pastoral idyll Eliot has created.
They merely serve as a reminder that the aristocracy are dying out.
In contrast to the dismal Lisbeth Bede and the gentry' women who contribute nothing to the community, is the lively Mrs Poyser.
She is an integral part of the community, however, it is her outspoken nature, similar to Chaucer's Wife of Bath that classifies Mrs Poyser as an outsider.
Eliot makes it clear that 'she would have her word about everything' and always 'keeps at the top o' the talk."
Indeed, Eliot devotes an entire chapter to Mrs Poyser having 'her say out,' the strength of her voice and opinion emphasised by Eliot's use of quotation marks in the chapter title.
Interestingly, Mrs Poyser is never punished for her strident remarks to the Old Squire Donnithorne.
I feel this is because her strong dialect and comical idioms undermine the strength of her arguments.
Raymond Williams agrees that these dialects evoke " a ballad element which denies  the possibility of articulating ideas and developing a higher consciousness."
This suggests that Mrs Poyser would not flourish outside Hayslope, yet Eliot creates the impression of Mrs Poyser's larger than life character being constrained by her social role within the community.
Her strength and intelligence are perhaps signals of a paradigm shift.
Continuing the comical motif is Bartle Massey, whose role as teacher within Hayslope also establishes an anticipation of change.
However, the strong female characters, like Mrs Poyser, with whom he has several comical disagreements, will not tolerate his misogynistic attitudes that paint women as 'adders' and 'wasps', which place him into the outsider category.
Similarly, Thias Bede is a drunk who neglects his duties to his family and thus lives in conflict with traditional religious beliefs and is silenced, through death, for these transgressions.
Likewise, Eliot uses Colonel Townley's status as an outsider, as a vehicle to introduce the reader to the novel.
However, it is Hetty and Dinah Morris who greatly transgress their social roles.
Hetty pursues her sexual desires, whilst Dinah becomes absorbed in religious fervour.
Both women are 'orphan' and Hayslope is not their natural home.
Dinah especially is continually urging to return to Snowfield.
Ironically, Hetty seems to fulfil her Rousseauian female role, she is the quintessential rural beauty who is subservient to males.
However, she wants to deny her family in pursuit of elevating her status; It is this denial of her family links that condemn her as an outsider.
The image of the courtroom at Hetty's trial ' haunted with the shadowy memories of old kings and queens' reinforces her betrayal of family loyalty.
She can only enter the path to redemption once she has acknowledged the importance of family, captured in the moment she longs for ' the bright hearth and the warmth and the voices of home."
Eliot 'others' Hetty by portraying her as never fully human; she is consistently referred to as a 'cat' or 'kitten ' and throughout the novel Hetty sees herself via reflections in mirrors.
The 'murder of her child' simultaneously contradicts religious beliefs and indicates her denial of the natural role of motherhood, both actions heavily transgressing the traditional ethics of Hayslope.
Like Thomas Hardy's Tess in Tess of the D'Urbervilles , Hetty's disruptive character is 'transported' from Hayslope, her identity removed as she becomes the nameless 'wanderer' and she is finally silenced through death.
However, many critics have criticised Eliot because "the final treatment of Hetty is unsatisfying," arguing that Hetty is not equipped to develop a sense of moral responsibility.
Ian Gregor argues that she "lives simply by the coercive morality of the community and, when this is broken, she is destroyed, she has no life apart from this."
Juxtaposed with Hetty is Dinah Morris.
Eliot immediately establishes her as an agent for change, her sermon upsets the social hierarchies of Hayslope life and Colonel Townley observes the 'total absence of self- consciousness in her demeanour."
She establishes a strong, radical feminine force in the novel that gives expression to the artisan classes.
However, Dinah's asceticism not only invites comparison between her the "Madonna" and Hetty the "Magdalene" but it also separates her from suffering and the community.
In chapter fifteen enititles ' the Two Bed Chambers,' Eliot is keen to stress that whilst Hetty views herself via reflections in the mirror, Dinah looks out of a window onto the world.
However, her gaze is detached and Eliot's reason perhaps for muting her radical voice.
when the female preachers are banned from preaching, is a method to teach Dinah the religion of humanity.
Indeed, critic David Carroll states that Hetty's "moral life can only arise from [her] reciprocal interaction with others."
Indeed, the reader becomes aware that the community only accepts Dinah after her marriage to Adam and she has assumed the role of wife and mother.
In many respects, Eliot's use of literary methods establishes the reader as an outsider.
The use of dialect creates a barrier between the reader and the characters.
Her complex construction of time, which is double removed, creates a sense of distance between reader and community.
Similarly, events within the novel are already in motion when the reader enters the story.
Arthur and Hetty already know each other, Dinah has not just arrived in Hayslope, and in fact she is about to return to Snowfield and Adam's relationship with his father has already deteriorated.
Despite her extensive intellectual knowledge, Eliot wrote Adam Bede "from a memory of a memory" of her childhood spent at Griff House in Warwickshire.
It seems she must return to her childooh to regain those feelings of love and sympathy integral to the religio of humanity that Feuerbach promoted.
Indeed throughout Adam Bede George Eliot carefully maps out the trajectory for the advanced intellectuals transition from God to good.
Eliot uses Adam and Alick the Shepard as vehicles to promote this religion of humanity, which believes 'there's the spirit o' God in all things and at all times - weekdays as well as Sunday."
It is love and sympathy for your fellow human beings, not faith in some obscure physical manifestation of God.
However, it is interesting to note that religion alienates certain characters within the novel.
Much like Hardy's Tess it offers Hetty no comfort in her time of need.
She views the parish as 'a prison' instead of a place of sanctuary.
It seems that a characters status as an outsider pivots on their adherence to this religion of humanity.
Those who are not selfless are either integrated or silenced.
Linked to these religious ideals were Eliot's ambitions for realism, which were inspired by the ' rare, precious quality of truthfulness...in many Dutch paintings...the delicious sympathy in these faithful pictures of a monotonous homely existence,' she feels it is 'needful we should remember their existence,' lest they become outsiders of English fiction.
Her ambition then is to create the literary equivalent of these paintings, as her manifesto stated in the Riehl essay shows her desire for English fiction to reveal the 'commonplace:' In conclusion, a sense of irony pervades the final stages of the novel, as it becomes apparent that a dialectic relationship exists between insiders and outsiders and old versus new.
The reader witnesses old beliefs being forced to the outside to make way for a new code of ethics, that invites change.
The old Squire has died; Arthur has 'plans of drainage and enclosure' of 'new ploughs and drills' to improve his grandfathers estate before he is informed of Hetty's conviction; Mr Irwine and his dated views are challenged by the Quixotic figures of Arthur and Dinah.
Arnold Kettle has remarked that Eliot viewed her novels as " a vehicle for instruction or edification, " therefore one expects Eliot's outsiders to experience the same heavy rejection she experienced as a result of her actions, but unlike Thomas Hardy, Eliot refrains from placing her outsiders in purgatory.
Their suffering is never acute.
As omniscient narrator she protects these carefully constructed characters from being rejected by the reader.
She opted for an eloquent Realistic conclusion to protect her fragile Victorian readers because she was a woman whose own role within community remained undefined and unaccepted until her death in 1880.
Susan Wiseman calculated that the latest possible date for the composition of The Famous Tragedie was only four months after Charles' execution as George Thomason, a collector of contemporary publications, received this text on 26 th May.
The speed at which this work was composed and printed displays the desperation of fervent Royalists to defend themselves and their murdered King.
Dale B. J Randall perceives that the Interregnum was a time when many 'set down their own reactions as spontaneously and passionately as a man might curse', which often produced tastelessly conspicuous literature.
A Puritan church leader, Richard Baxter, expressed his concern that the freedom of the press allowed 'every ignorant, empty braine ' to communicate with the masses through poor quality literature.
During the civil war, the press provided a tool to connect the upper and lower classes by offering, whether true or false, political information.
This freedom contributed to the production of low standard material as it encouraged the common, less educated man to have an opinion and express it through writing.
However, Lois Potter suggests that the pressure of a heavily informed, divided nation even affected the creative output of capable writers as they sometimes rejected 'their theories about style and vocabulary when, abandoning them, they could score a point'.
Both Wiseman and Randall agree that, while The Famous Tragedie is neither a dull nor weak play, it is heavily flawed as a piece of persuasive literature.
Its strong, aggressive attack on the Reformation and abandonment of any 'degree of religio-political analysis' limits its readership only to 'those already hostile to parliament' .
Although the success of this propaganda, in persuading its seventeenth-century readership, cannot be measured, this text was hardly written in vain as it is widely believed that royalist writings strongly assisted the restoration of the monarchy in 1660.
Although Parliament attempted to censor politically-sensitive material in the 1640s, beginning with the abolition of Star Chamber in 1641, the severity of penalties was not enough to silence Royalists until the Printing Act of 20 th September 1649, which promised heavy fines or imprisonment in response to treasonable behaviour .
Therefore, The Famous Tragedie was printed at a time when masses of politically-biased literature was produced.
This competitive market developed an attraction to attaching a writer's name to a work as 'a work written by a saleable author was considerably more saleable and authoritative than an anonymous one' .
Considering this advantage, it is possible that the writer chose anonymity in adherence to the courtly tradition not to publish material, rather than to protect himself from Parliament's wrath.
The writer's decision to apply the vernacular to the large majority of his work displays courage as the accessibility of this language to the public increased the threat to the Reformists and, as a result, to the writer.
However, a single bilingual sentence has been inserted in the introduction, which begins, 'Basely Butchered by those who are' and concludes in Latin.
Although the play's entirety is the work of the writer's imagination, the dramatic choice of propaganda allows him, elsewhere, to indirectly place damaging criticism in the voices of others.
The use of Latin cleverly disguises his personal attack on Parliament, while the bilingual sentence is enough to indicate to readers, who cannot comprehend Latin, that this section contains cutting insults.
Potter explains that a true indication of the risk of creating royalist propaganda heavily depended on the anonymity of the publisher, as it was more difficult for them to be concealed .
The use of antithesis in this criticism emphasises the devolutionary effect of the supposedly evolutionary Reform on the nation.
Potter observes that Parliament imposed transformation on old English customs, which led the Stuarts to become identified with 'the same golden past that had previously been associated with Elizabeth I' .
The prologue to the gentry, included in this work, outlines the author's hostility to the transformation on social hierarchy that had previously been provided by the monarchy.
He enumerates literary icons, such as Johnson and Devenant, in order to promote the cultural aesthetic of Charles I's court, and declares the Reformists 'villaines'  to have thieved such traditions from society.
Potter asserts that this argument often distanced the public from support of the Royalist party as Parliament's "levelling" design was more attractive to the ordinary man.
However, the writer's presentation of power-hungry Cromwell suggests that the abolition of social hierarchy is an unattainable ideal.
He implies that, while Cromwell may publicly reject the hierarchical structure of the monarchy, he privately hopes that the regicide will earn him the crown.
Cromwell's hypocrisy is particularly implied in his soliloquy where, in privacy from his army, the reader has the opportunity to witness his true thoughts.
Following compliments to Peters' rhetorical skill in previous scenes, he does not hesitate to mock his 'deere Buffoone'  in his own company.
Fairfax is also a victim of his leader's contempt.
Cromwell's General and Commander in Chief is rejected as a 'silly Foole'  in private, and immediately transformed into 'our great Generall the Lord Fairfax'  when Cromwell is immersed in company.
The writer implies that Cromwell is a dishonest and manipulative leader who, in elevating himself above his men, hypocritically parallels the structure of the monarchy and places himself in the highest possible position.
The inseparable connection between religion and politics in the 1640s is emphasised as early as the Patron's introductory note to this work: The Patron implies that a man's political stance during the civil war was an indicator of the sincerity of his faith in God.
Essentially, the war emerged from conflicts in religious thinking.
The Royalists favoured the Church of England, as governed by the King, who heavily encouraged Archbishop Laud's influence.
In stark opposition, the Reformists connected Laud's worship with popery and sought to destroy anything which attached Protestantism to the Roman Catholic Church, including The Book of Common Prayer, church festivals and images of saints, angels and persons of the Trinity.
John Morrill came to the conclusion that a compromise between Parliamentarians and Royalists could have been attainable by returning to 'a sort of Anglican Congregationalism' where episcopacy was abandoned.
However, the dismissal of this peaceful settlement, by a small number of committed puritans, caused the war to happen.
Although the Reformists won the war, they had to fight a second battle to win the peace.
Their decision to kill the King hardly demonstrated conformity to Christian ethics of forgiveness or repentance, creating a necessity to dramatically transform their image from murderous rebels into virtuous saints.
Throughout The Famous Tragedie, the writer aims to thwart these efforts by depicting the leaders of the Parliamentarian army as licentious, deceitful villains.
The writer shapes Reformists as destructive devils whose plans are 'hatch'd in Hell' .
This comparison implies that to be a Reformist is to support the greatest enemies of God and assist them in infecting Christianity.
In addition, the writer implies that Cromwell and Peters are sophisticated Machiavellians who lack the moral capacity that provides the foundations of any religion.
Peters is seen extending his unethical behaviour to Mrs Lambert by successfully persuading her to be unfaithful to her husband, while Cromwell's application of his intellectual strength to deceive his public is a constant reminder that he cannot be trusted.
While these attacks boast some plausibility, Wiseman is unconvinced that this technique is entirely successful.
She considers that the writer's extension of satire towards 'physical attributes and sexual transgressions' simply registers 'the increasing hopelessness of the royal position' .
The writer certainly enters unstable territory when he directs an insult towards Cromwell's nose, using a comparison to Mount Etna, in the unlikely voice of Peters.
He also suggests Cromwell would dare to taint the sanctity of his own, or another's, marriage.
Unsurprisingly, this corrupt image of Parliament is heavily contrasted with flawless representatives of the royalist party, such as Charles Lucas and George Lisle, who demonstrate tremendous faith, comradeship and valour throughout this drama.
They are clearly outlined as virtuous victims of the siege of Colchester as, despite surrendering, they are ruthlessly killed.
Wiseman notices that the author only scars his polarisation of Royalists and Parliamentarians through his presentation of Fairfax .
The General is witnessed suggesting a verbal negotiation with the Royalists in protection of Colchester, which displays him as a balanced, pacifistic leader.
The author implies that his name can be used as an aptronym, as he is both fair in name and nature.
His attractive attitude towards warfare is emphasised by the inclusion of Rainsborough, who alternatively demonstrates strong aggression and blood thirst in his treatment of the opposition: The author's presentation of Fairfax is echoed by Milton's Sonnet XV, On the Lord General Fairfax at the Siege of Colchester, which celebrates the Reformist victory.
However, Milton indicates that he has faith in this General to serve his country in 'nobler' means than war.
While he can perceive 'valour'  in Parliamentarian warfare, this is often disguised by bloodshed.
He appeals to Fairfax to rapidly restore 'truth and right'  to the nation in order to limit further destruction.
This disagreement amongst the men of Parliament exemplifies a wider problem.
Throughout this play, the writer indicates that the Reformists are a great distance from being a united force.
Peters demonstrates obedience to Cromwell throughout this play until he questions why he behaves so wickedly, while the soldiers commanded to murder Lucas and Lisle cannot forgive themselves for their sins and seek repentance by murdering Rainsborough.
Potter underlines this problem by observing that 'Cromwell may have said that he knew what he did not want, but not what he did'  which questions how an army can be expected to work together towards a single goal when they are ignorant of their target.
The writer uses this tragedy to look towards a hopeful future by relating sorrowful events of the past.
In the second Act, before the King meets his death, Sir Charles Lucas draws parallels between him and Christ: The grief of losing their King can, in part, be consoled by shaping a martyr out of Charles I.
As early as May 1640, Archbishop Laud stated that 'no man in England  more ready to be a martyr for our religion than his majesty' and Potter notes that some writers ambiguously abbreviated both Christ and Charles with 'Ch' .
The writer's emphasis of Charles' Christ-like quality presents the opposition in an incredibly harsh light by comparing them to the Jews who bestially and unjustifiably crucified a virtuous man.
This technique also endorses the depiction of the Reformation as a battle against God and Christianity.
One of the writer's strongest arguments against Parliament concerns royal posterity, as Cromwell's interference in the natural order of national leadership is presented as thieving the Prince of Wales of his kingdom.
The writer indicates that, while the nation's ideas of justice are conflicted, the higher powers are observing Parliament's barbarous interference and preparing to correct the balance of power by punishing them: This threat is endorsed by verses dedicated to Charles II, which encourage him to overthrow the Reformation and avenge his father's death by accessing his rightful position on the throne.
His persuasive technique is carefully crafted, in these verses, by flattering the Prince and stressing the negative effect of the 'holy miscreants, and Religious Fiends'  on his nation.
The writer implies that, although the Royalists' current efforts have not yet been rewarded, their names will be immortalised when their present becomes history: This is heavily ironic as the writer aims to glorify Royalist heroes throughout this play in appreciation of their efforts to preserve King and monarchy.
He looks forward to a time when great men, including Charles I, Charles Lucas and George Lisle, will be rewarded for the sacrifices they made to assist the Restoration of the monarchy.
As a persuasive text, The Famous Tragedie's cleverly crafted technical foundations display potential.
The writer chose to express Parliament's destructive influence on the nation, present the Reform's transformation on Christianity as an infection, and display hostility to their interference in, what could have otherwise been, a peaceful decade.
However, this potential is lost amongst sensationalised rumours that are stretched outside credible boundaries.
While it may have been necessary to produce shocking material in competition for readership, the writer dramatically reduces the impact of this text by inventing unconvincing accusations in an already fictional work.
Therefore, The Famous Tragedie is heavily flawed, as its lack of restraint creates an unreasoned argument that says more about the desperation of the Royalist position than the injustice of Parliament.
Externally, it would appear that there are very few parallels between Louise Bennett's poem Home Sickness and Robyn Bolam's Gruoch.
One is a wistful and nostalgic reflection about Jamaican life whilst the other is a dark attempt to re-write Lady Macbeth's tumultuous history.
The nature of identity and the individuality of one's voice are prominent themes in both poems.
Home Sickness is a context sensitive poem littered with personal pronouns such as 'me' which make it a highly personal exploration of self and belonging.
The colourful tone almost belies the introspective side of the poem.
This arises from Bennett's examination of the problematic nature of displacement.
The importance of culture, place and language dominate the poem.
Similitude between the poems can be seen from the outset.
The declarative sentence that opens Gruoch has almost defiant and audacious undertones that imply a strong sense of pride and confidence in the speaker's identity; 'I have a name of my own.'
A caesura breaks the rhythm of the line and focuses our attention on her name thus emphasising its importance.
It is resolutely Gruoch's poem; Bolam adopts her persona and voice thus embedding her presence firmly in the poem.
Bolam's amalgamation of differing poetic devises and structural elements forms the basis of a unique free verse that lacks constructional restriction.
This allows Gruoch to express her feelings and assert her independence in an unimpeded manner.
The authenticity of the narrator's voice in Home Sickness is created through the use of Jamaican Creole.
Home Sickness betrays Bennett's firm linguistic fingerprint due to the use of idiodialect and Afro-Caribbean phonetics.
The use of native grammar and spellings i.e.
'fi,' 'an,' and 'dem' helps demonstrate the heteroglossia of the English language.
It also allows Bennett to remain faithful to her roots by expressing herself in the Jamaican vernacular.
This is reminiscent of Gillian Clarke's technique in the poem A letter from a far country.
She also used the influence of her native language to create her own personalised poetic voice that allowed her assert her identity and sense of self.
As an English writer, Bolam doesn't write in the Scottish vernacular as Scots writers such as Lochhead and Leonard do, but she succeeds in making Gruoch context sensitive through allusions to Scottish history.
The use of Creole idiom in Home Sickness effects the pronunciation and placement of certain stresses and can vary syllable length, thus making scansion difficult.
The overall effect of Gruoch suggests that it is written in tetrameter, but this is not a consistent pattern as the number of feet generally differs slightly per line.
The lack of a regular stress pattern in Gruoch reflects the lack of stability within Gruoch's life and identity.
Variable use of enjambment, end stopping and apostrophes that coincide with both clauses and sentence breaks, adds to the poem's unique and inconsistent rhythmic effect.
Sociolect and allusions to everyday and somewhat stereotypical aspects of Jamaican life i.e.
'black smaddy' ensures that Home Sickness , like Gruoch is heavily context dependant.
Our understanding as British readers can be impeded by the use of Jamaican Creole.
Afro-Caribbean dispora can make establishing the meaning and nuance of certain unfamiliar words such as 'nyam' and 'gwan' difficult.
Home Sickness betrays the influence of African slave poetry's aural traditions, as it too has been written for informal oral presentation.
The use of elision i.e.
'people-dem' and enjambment, conveys the animated energy and natural rhythm of the narrator's colloquial speaking voice.
Ellipsis adds to this effect as it is a common feature in routine speech; i.e.
'coaknut' and 'galang' as opposed to go along.
Enjambment creates a lyrical quality that allows the reader to be carried along by a tide of astute and perspicacious comments that elevate Bennett's rhetorical deftness, whilst providing a flowing rhythm that evokes the relaxed flow of life in the Caribbean.
In Home Sickness, pungent and evocative gustatory imagery relating to food i.e.
'Fi a dumplin, a duckoonoo,' remind the narrator of how exotic and therefore distant her homeland is.
These collocations are strikingly new for some readers but comfortingly familiar to the narrator.
Her longing for Jamaica is conveyed through allusions to thirst and hunger; 'But me belly dissa holler/ fi a plate a rice and peas.'
This phrase can be interpreted as a metaphor.
The active and transitive verb 'holler,' implies an almost angry desire and desperation to go home due to the onomatopoeic nature of the word.
An image of salivation reinforces her sense of depravation and suffering, and is created through the parallelism of similar word and sound structures in the line; 'An me mout-top start fi water/ Me mout-corner start fi foam.'
The binary themes of displacement and belonging dominate the poem.
The unrelenting and fierce heat of the 'broiling sun' reflects the strength and intensity of the narrator's love for Jamaica.
This is then juxtaposed with the paradoxical cooling and soothing properties of the sea.
A similar technique is employed in the third stanza in comparing the disparity between the hot spice and ice.
Juxtaposition and antithesis fortify the theme of division in the poem as the narrator appears divided between her homeland and England.
The proliferation of exclamatory sentences and humour jars somewhat with the poem's underlying seriousness.
For example, the incongruity and improbability of seeing a; 'hairy mango pon de road!'
in England, both amuses and saddens the narrator by reminding her of the divergence and distance between both places.
Bennett uses mainly nouns and verbs that relate to place and movement.
A recurrent travelling motif arises through references to roads and roaming.
The repetition of 'galang'creates a kinaesthetic image that adds movement to both her literal and metaphorical journey to discover where her home lies.
The metaphor; 'A dose a hungry buckle-hole me' conveys a sense of being incomplete as 'hole' and 'hunger' imply that she is missing something.
Being away from Jamaica deprives her of a part of her identity.
The repetition of the vowel sound in the word 'waan,' creates a noise similar to a wail that sounds almost like a child's cry.
Like a child, the narrator looks to her family for comfort and security.
Both poems contain ambiguous elements that create exploitable connotations within the language.
Bolam's ambivalent use of the pronoun 'he' ensures that we are never sure who she is discussing.
We can only assume it's Gillecomgain in the first stanza and then Macbeth.
In Homesickness, ambiguity is used in the final stanza to help us share the narrator's confusion and to relate the complexity of narrator's relationship with Jamaica.
Exclamatory sentences ensure that the poem ends on a sanguine note, but a sense of loss and depravation continues to pervade the poem.
Whilst the narrator feels relived to find a reason to belong in England, the interrogative structure of the sentence 'to me wha?,' implies that she remains unsure about what exactly binds her to Jamaica.
Bennett's use of the possessive pronoun me in 'me Jamaica'  is somewhat ironic.
The narrator implies that she possesses Jamaica, when in reality, it is the country that owns her- her history and culture is embedded in Jamaica and will therefore always bind her.
The importance of family, roots and a sense of belonging is also explored in Gruoch ; Gruoch's pride in her ancestry resembles Bennett's pride in her homeland and language.
Gruoch is a figure associated with female strength and influence largely due to Shakespeare's portrayal of the ruthless and manipulative Lady Macbeth.
Unlike Gruoch, Lady Macbeth sees her feminine tenderness as a sign of weakness, demanding; 'Unsex me here/ and fill me from the crown to the toe-full/ of direst cruelly', whereas Gruoch relishes her carnal sexuality.
The poem moves into the progressive present tense during the first stanza thus crating a frenzied and passionate immediacy around the sexual action.
Active and transitive verbs such as, 'crush' and 'grasping' create both claustrophobic and violent sexual images that convey the all-consuming desire and intimacy of the moment.
The scene could be interpreted as one of violation as Gruoch appears powerless and oppressed by his actions.
Consonance i.e.
'grasping it in his fists,' creates a breathless excitement within the tone that infers that whilst he has physical dominance, she actually controls the situation in creating the desire that drives his actions.
Bolam's dextrous manipulation of language allows her to evolve the simile 'like a tent '  into a metaphor for sex; 'folds slipped open.'
Phallic images are created through allusions to 'rope' and a 'stake.'
The tent image is developed further in the line; 'succulent as split stems.'
The fricative sibilance here suggests that it this a welcome act due to the indulgent and sensual nature of these sounds.
Gruoch, like this image and its representation, undergoes a process of transformation throughout the poem.
She changes from sexual being to mother, wife to queen.
We must therefore question the degree of power she has over her life and identity.
It would seem that men are responsible for controlling and defining her role.
Like Gruoch, the way her name is said metamorphoses.
It is a guttural and primitive 'growl' when she is immersed in animalistic sexual behaviour; then uttered in wonder when she is Queen, thus conveying the reverence and respect she deserves and ends as a whisper when she beings to lose faith in her self and power.
Gruoch is seen at the height of her power in the second stanza, portrayed as more influential and efficacious than war and all other women; 'war nor wantons wrenched him from me.'
Gruoch's resilience and tenacity is elevated here thus making her impotence in the final stanza more dramatic, 'Seventeen years we reigned together through/ keen seasons of hunger, feasting one to other.'
Images of hunger and nourishment are reminiscent of those in Bennett's poem; the narrator wishes to satiate her hunger by feasting on her country's food, whereas Gruoch and Macbeth feast upon one another and their power.
Collocations relating to death such as 'obsequies,' make the third stanza a lament about the death of love.
The adjective 'dry' implies that their bed is arid and barren; devoid of life and fire.
Gruoch, like Bennett is overcome by thirst, but her thirst is for love and passion.
A metaphorical winter has descend between them, as their relationship has become cold and insipid.
There is no warmth to ensure that 'buds' are 'stirring.'.
Opportunistic alliteration in the line 'my mouth meandered', could be interpreted as a metaphor for the kiss of life, as she attempts to revive their passion and give new life to their love.
Her failure to do so makes her feel impotent and powerless.
Having lost her ability to control men through their sexual desire for her, Gruoch feels that her identity has been diminished.
Bennett too makes use of occasional and opportunistic alliteration i.e.
'beefy, blacky.'
The funeral motif in the final stanza ensures that a palpable sense of loss and bereavement permeates the poem.
By the end her name is 'despairing: our death rattle.'
These plosive sounds submerge us in Gruoch's anguish and regret whilst adding to the dark and menacing nature of the 'death rattle.'
The colon following 'despairing' creates a finality that implies nothing can bring their passion back.
This melancholic, despondent and subdued ending contrasts starkly with the confidence of the opening.
The visual form of the poems differ.
In Gruoch, the stanza length decreases.
This reflects the gradual death of passion in Gruoch's life.
The poem ebbs and fades away leaving us with the strong sense of loss.
Unlike Gruoch, Home Sickness has a measured and regular structure that consists of nine quatrains.
This, along with the systematic and structural use of rhyme between each second and final line, contrasts with the inconsistency of the narrator's emotional journey.
There is an internal rhyme within Gruoch at the start of the second stanza that emphasises the significance of certain words.
The rhyme arises because there are thirteen syllables before 'daughter' and thirteen syllables before 'slaughter. '
Both poets therefore use their verbal artistry to manipulate form and language.
Whilst there is marked diversity between the thematic content, rhetoric and grammatical form of the poems, the poets employ some similar poetic techniques to manifest their notions.
Both poets strive to express their voice in a way that is both eloquent and authentic.
The divergence regarding the cultural and linguistic influences upon the poets ensures that their works are acutely individual.
The term 'Romanticism' was not recognised as a distinct movement or object of study until the late nineteenth century.
During this period there were a number of revolutions, political, cultural and literary.
However, Blake, Wordsworth, Coleridge, Byron Shelley and Keats, often referred to as the 'big six' by no means regarded themselves as a unified group and were actually much divided in their political, religious and artistic beliefs.
John Blades notes that whilst these recognisable figures of Romantic poetry were aware of each others' work, "they did not form a recognisable group with anything like a united artistic manifesto."
They did, however, share a strong opposition to the rigid and artificial diction of the Neo-Classical literary movement of the eighteenth century and strove to create poetry which would illustrate "a natural delineation of human passions, human characters and human incidents."
Politically, the Romantics were against authoritarian government and favoured democracy.
They were also attracted to Rousseau and Godwin's campaigns in the cause of humanity.
Emotionally, they expressed an extreme assertion of the self, the value of individual experience and the dynamic nature of the imagination.
It is vital to reinforce that although the 'Romantic poets were united in their resistance' to eighteenth century literary culture, "it would be misleading to describe them as a combined 'school'".
This 'pluralism' of ideals is one way in which the Romantic poets differed greatly from their predecessors of the Neo-Classical movement, whose united, rational ideals were in great contrast to those of the Romantic period.
Where the Romantics considered it to be "the honourable characteristic of poetry that its materials are to be found in every subject which can interest the human mind", Neo-Classicism generalised about people and was inclined to assume that "all people were in essence uniform", thus disregarding the areas of human interest that were central to Romantic poetry.
It 'diminished the importance of individual perception and expression, in exchange for conformity and mechanistic formalism.
The way in the Romantic poets 'revolutionised' such rational and structured ideas is abundantly evident in William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge's Lyrical Ballads, "arguably the most important single volume of the romantic period" which "signalled a literary revolution."
In his 'Advertisement'  for the anthology, Wordsworth wrote of the poems: "They were written with a view to ascertain how far the language of conversation in the middle and lower classes of society is adapted to the purposes of poetic pleasure."
Wordsworth and Coleridge did not use the format of the couplet which dominated eighteenth century poetry but wrote in quatrain, hymn - like ballad form, and experimented with other poetic structures.
Furthermore, they wrote in simple verse which was in direct contrast to the popular periphrasis used extensively by eighteenth century poets such as Pope, Swift and Sheridan.
In the Preface Wordsworth contrasts these two types of language describing the latter as "arbitrary and capricious habits of expression....to furnish food for fickle tastes, and fickle appetites, of their own creation."
These new modes of expression are directly linked to the Romantic revolution in aesthetic perspective and attitude towards previously ignored areas of "artistic interest, namely the imagination and intuition."
The 'revolutions' of the Romantic period are often viewed to have been partially inspired by the ideals of two key figures, the Swiss philosopher Jean-Jaques Rousseau and William Godwin, an English essayist and political idealist who shared many of Rousseau's ideas.
John Blades argues that Rousseau was "the seminar force in the revolution of thought that produced the Romantics."
His focus on the emotional power of nature objection to the artificiality of Neo-Classicism is indeed directly linked to many of the ideals of the Romantic poets who saw nature as a source of inspiration and affection.
Although the Romantics were not revolutionary in their admiration of nature, the way in which they used it as a source of truth and inspiration within their poetry was indeed a literary revolution of the period.
Prior to this period, Neo-Classicism wrote of nature as something mundane and almost lifeless.
This movement remained rooted in Greek and Roman models of interpretation, and as a result, "the pastoral was a fairly conventional, flattened vision of bucolic life."
In contrast to this the romantics saw in nature a much greater power and were largely interested in the moral powers of nature and the way in which they could affect the human psyche and conscience.
By and large the Romantics saw nature as an educational force in human morality: Both Wordsworth and Coleridge took this idea further in the Lyrical Ballads through the poems 'The Dungeon'  and Wordwoth's 'The Convict' .
Prison reform was a topical issue in the politics of the time during which these poems were composed.
Both poems illustrate the Romantic belief in "the experience of being harmonized and healed by nature."
Coleridge writes of contemporary prison conditions: Wordsworth echo's his colleague's argument in his own poems, asserting nature's moral power on the human mind: This relates to the way in which the Romantics regarded nature as "potentially the landscape of the mind itself; they believed that nature contained transcendent truths, which could condition the human mind in a way that the Urban or social environment of the period could not.
The Romantics vision of nature was also revolutionary in the way in which it contradicted greatly the political and cultural revolutions for the period.
For Wordsworth in particular, the industrial revolution, expansion of cities, and technological advances created a distinct feeling of 'alienation', whereby the individual became mechanised and distanced from aspects of 'natural' humanity.
He observed the way in which time became disciplined and the way in which the division in labour within factories 'alienated' man from their craft.
This is largely evident in Wordsworth's poem 'Composed Upon Westminster Bridge.'
Wordsworth's poem has been described as "...a celebration of the wealth, power and beauty of London."
The grandiose language evokes what might be regarded as a pompous celebration of the power of the city, and in a sense suggests that what is in essemce 'artificial' is a pinnacle of human achievement.
However, it is perhaps more accurate to read the aesthetic terminology employed as emphasising the external purity and natural beauty of the city.
It is interesting to read Dorothy Wordsworth's account of the same moment and image.
Her statement, "The houses were not overhung by their cloud of smoke" implies that industrialisation had started to have a significant effect on London.
Indeed the poem was written at a time of a "gradual convergence of imperialist and capitalist practices in the process of modernization," during which occurred an "overall change in attitudes, perspectives, relations, knowledges and practices."
Wordsworth's sonnet images London as a 'spot of time', a momentary and temporary snapshot vision of the capital city.
This technique for Wordsworth was a form of escape from "the multitude of causes unknown to former times."
He regarded it as a "'feeble endeavour' to resist the changes taking place [in Britain] by appealing to Nature as an alternative."
What Wordsworth was reacting against was the artificial and constructed state of urban culture and humanity of the modern time.
In Westminster Bridge, "the naturalization of the artificial would represent the ultimate victory of both the spot of time and the natural poet over the process of modernization."
The use of the spot of time concept creates a distinctly still and isolated image.
In his sonnet, it is quite apparent that Wordsworth seems only to find beauty in the city in the absence of urban activity; his aesthetics seem only to work on the basis of human absence.
Makdisi suggests that the "natural bowers" in Wordsworth's poetry work as spots of time "by virtue of their opposition to the "artificial" and unnatural world of humanity as the latter had been corrupted in the age of modernization."
It is through "the people, the practitioners and producers of the space of London that Wordsworth sees the difference between country and city."
Indeed, in the absence of human life, Wordsworth brings the city and the countryside closer together.
He achieves this through the transformation of the cityscape into a "naturalized and greened landscape."
The "Ships, towers, domes, theatres and temples" are juxtaposed with "fields", "valley, rock" and "hill" and there appears to be no distinction between the two.
It is only through the absence of urban and human activity that Wordsworth can find such beauty to write about, and articulate through this beauty his opposition to the effects of modernisation.
One immediate observation that can be made about Wordsworth's sonnet is its emphasis on the external, natural beauty of the city, a vision evoking an emotional response.
"This City... All bright and glittering" creates in the narrator "a calm so deep".
The equation drawn between the visible sense and inner emotion, here, begins with the external appreciation of beauty and nature, a common feature in Romantic poetry.
One literary revolution of the period was the way in which the Romantic poets found in nature a transcendental quality.
Nature seemed to take on a "mystical or religious significance, possessing power and radiance, nature becomes transfigured into something actually beyond the power of man to comprehend or rationalise."
In Coleridge's poem 'The Nightingale: A Conversational Poem, he writes that "In nature there is nothing melancholy."
Rousseau and Godwin also inspired the Romantics in their fervent campaigns in the cause of humanity.
Blake's concept of the abstract was strongly related to Wordsworth's notion of 'alienation'.
Blake believed that the way in which 'abstract' labelled people conceptually was the direct opposite to humanity, which showed compassion and empathy for the individual.
Blake was the earliest of the major romantic poets and used a new distinctive style of poetry to combine politics and literature.
His 'Songs of Innocence' and 'Songs of 'Experience' express his own anxieties about the modern world.
Blake's exultation of humanity was deliberately opposed to the effects the Age of Enlightenment had on society at large.
The scientific discoveries of Isaac Newton about the workings universe as an independently functioning mechanism encouraged the view that universal laws existed "behind all things, including art and ethics."
People began to use and place the notion of the Universe over individuality and humanity; the individual self was seen as almost insignificant.
In his poetry Blake attempts to bring everything back into the human form through the belief that it is through man that the Universe can perceive and contemplate itself.
Blake's 'Songs of Innocence' were not intended to suggest that a pure view of nature and humanity can only be found through a child's eyes, but that people can chose at anytime to contemplate and understand the world in such a way; humanity is more important than laws and science which form the 'abstract': In this poem, Blake refers to the way in which man was made in God's image and that is through humanity itself that people can relate to God.
Religion was also an area of great contempt within the Romantic period.
This is illustrated greatly in Blake's works.
It was not against Christianity that Blake was writing, but against the institution of the church and the way in which it was inaccessible to most people.
In his poem 'I saw a Chapel all of Gold' Blake suggests that the psychology of religion and sexuality at this time is bound, giving a critique of the destructive ideological way that sexuality had been conceptualised.
The image of a chapel was itself sometimes used to represent female genitalia or sexuality, which during this period was highly valued and regarded as something that should be protected.
The way in which the 'serpent' is imaged to ejaculate, "Vomiting his poison out / On the bread and on the wine" is a direct attack on the corruption, or abstraction of the church.
At the end of the poem the speaker retreats "into a sty/ And laid me down among the swine."
In the Bible, pigs are ritually unclean; hence this action of sleeping in a pig sty rather than the church is an extremely strong attack on religious institution.
Four Poems in Process, 2002, by Mario Petrucci and Judge Dreadword by Victor Questel both address linguistic issues.
Each poem looks at the ways in which 'acceptable' or traditional language practices can be altered.
Although the poems both share the same theme, the poets approach the subject matter in very different ways.
Petrucci explores, through the use of poeclectics, how traditional forms can be manipulated to the point where the meaning is altered.
In contrast to this almost celebratory approach, Questel looks at how such manipulations of language can be rejected and oppressed.
Poeclectics, as defined by Petrucci, is a growing tendency for poets to "utilise more freely...a variety of texts, styles, voices, registers and forms".
It is "a re-orientation towards Re-Writing that re-emphasises the conventional re-visitation of literature's more recognisable 'voices'."
Petrucci uses such techniques in his  Four Poems in Process, 2002.
In each, he takes a traditional form and manipulates the text to form something quite distinctly different.
The first, The Complete Letter Guide, takes the traditional forms of various different letters.
Through re-arrangement and fragmentation, Petrucci creates a humorous and ironic piece.
The verse is fragmented into line segments, which uses the "familiar and perhaps key 'Intra-textual technique' - the cut-up."
The way in which the text is broken up leads to the juxtaposition of contrasting initial statements that, through the enjambment and even stanzas creates an ironic effect.
An example would be between the second and third stanzas.
'Mr.
Bird' at the end of the second verse appears to be the object of the statement.
However, the tone of the letter changes in a humorous way when we read the opening of stanza three, to discover it is the death of the recipient's Chihuahua, not Mr. Bird.
Victor Questel also uses enjambment and caesuras extensively in Judge Dreadword, however, the effect is distinctively different to that of Petrucci's work.
Questel's poem refers to Rastafarian Youth Culture 'Dread Talk', which developed as "a formal way to refuse the Anglo-Saxon seizure on the Jamaican people and to reinterpret the new heritage."
The central character, 'Rude boy Q', is being accused of practicing this Creole both in speech and writing.
The use of enjambment and caesura has two different effects.
As a dramatist and writer of performance poetry, Questal can be seen to use such techniques in order to create the drama of the scene we are presented with.
It is possible, however, to see such techniques as being a reflection of the manipulation of language against accepted contemporary forms.
Although the enjambment between stanzas four and five is ironic, since the reader is also not 'looking', the effect of this, as with other occasions in the text, is that the verse is disjointed.
This is also apparent in Petrucci's Reflections, between stanzas two and three, where the simile 'black / as a space-time singularity,' is divided.
On other occasions, in Judge Dreadword the enjambment creates tone through the encouragement of stress on certain words.
An example of this is line eighteen when the vowel sound of 'every day'' becomes stressed and hard because it has been placed at the start of the line.
In order to demonstrate their chosen theme, the poems Mutations and Judge Dreadword manipulate traditional ideas and forms to achieve the poets' desired effects.
In Mutations Petrucci's experimentation is one of "implicit Intertextuality"; taking a "reader orientated" text and translating "not between languages, but from one discipline to another."
This, he describes as a "Centrifugal tactic".
Petrucci takes the first line from the children's nursery rhyme, Little Bo - Peep, which has a regular scansion with an inverted stress in the first foot of the line, then using poeclectic tactics and genetic variation he 'mutate[s]' the first line, developing it into a contrasting, sinister phrase.
Petrucci demonstrates how the alteration of vowel sounds, stresses and grammar can change, not only what the text means, but how it sounds.
As a piece of performance poetry its true effect can only be fully understood when it is read aloud.
Written phonetically it is "astonishing to arrive at that point in the poem which drives one irresistibly to speak in Scots."
Although Judge Dreadword is not written phonetically, there is in the second stanza, hints of a sociolect.
In the third line, 'I have a language in a vice all my own', there is ellipsis of the word 'of' between 'all' and 'my'.
The main way Questel demonstrates this theme however, is through the content of the poem and his use - or misuse - of the poem form.
'Rude boy Q' is being charged with the murder of the English language; the poem opens with 'I am a murderer'.
In Judge Dreadword the key theme of shifting traditional English forms to something more uniquely distinguished, is heavily dramatised.
Questel personifies the English language and the particles used within it.
The poem refers to 'Dread talk', in which alterations have been made to the English language many in the form of 'Up-full sounds'.
Through the twentieth century, "the phonological structure of the English words was probed and broken into two to expose the opposition between the sounds and the significance of the words."
Everything 'Rude boy Q' claims to do or is accused of doing relates to this development of a more distinct language that helped form the Rastafarian identity.
The sentences the defendant is charged with reflect the time of suffering and oppression  that the Jamaican people have experienced and still experience today through racism.
The writers listed at the end of the eighth and beginning of the ninth stanza are all controversial writers from around the world.
Lorca was murdered by nationalists in Spain; Pasternak was expelled from the Union of Soviet Writers for his novel Doctor Zhivago; Russian poet, Mandelstam and Li-Po from China were exiled for their work.
They are used in the poem as examples of 'word merchants', who 'abuse' tradition.
This breaking of tradition is also evident in the use of the poem form in the text itself.
At times there is some sense of rhythm, for example in the first line, 'I wring words by the rough of the neck', the repeated 'r' sound of 'wring' and 'rough' gives the text a fluidity.
There also other poetic techniques employed such as rhyme in the penultimate stanza , and part rhyme in the first and second stanzas ; there are also several examples of alliteration, such as in the ninth stanza, 'product of proven tradition'.
The repeated 'P' gives a momentary sense of rhythm and infuses a dramatically angry and threatening tone.
Overall, however, there appears to be little more, other than its appearance on the page, which defines the text as a traditional poem.
Aloud, it reads as a dramatic dialogue which, on a macro-textual level, can be analysed through the power relations and social rules of the speakers; the Judge holds a higher status and thus has authority over 'Rude boy Q'.
This is demonstrated through his repeated use of imperatives, 'Hush up'; 'Don't interrupt'.
It might be possible then, to suggest that Questel demonstrates the manipulation, or 'mutation' of traditional or 'accepted' English in his own use of the poem form.
Petrucci's poem Reflections also explicitly demonstrates such breakings of traditional forms using a "tactic of inversion applied to platitudes or common sayings."
The poem is made up of similes, which are de-familiarised from their common usage.
Petrucci uses various different poetic techniques, such as alliteration  and the repetition of the 't' sound in the third line to create a tone that prevents the inversions becoming "facile humour" and "manages to reverse the logic of cliché to [a] distinctly non-comic effect".
This illustrates clearly how the manipulation of the familiar can create something distinctly different in sound, tone and more importantly meaning.
However, it is not only the manipulation of common idioms that demonstrates the central theme of altering traditional patterns and forms.
Although there is an almost regular rhythm, the verse scansion has been very cleverly worked upon to illustrate the title of the poem.
The feet measurements of each line are, in most cases, a reversal  or close opposite of another line close to it.
The first line scans as follows: It reads trochee, dactyl, trochee.
The second line scans the exact opposite: This reads iambus, anapaest, iambus, which is a full reversal of the first line.
The third line follows as a repeat of the first, but with an inverted stress at the beginning of the line.
In the second stanza, the first and last lines are almost the exact opposite of each other also.
In the third stanza lines eleven and twelve are worth noting: The first two feet of line twelve reverse the stress pattern of the last two feet of line eleven; line eleven ends iambus followed by two unstressed syllables, whilst line twelve begins with a reversal: two unstressed syllables, trochee.
The final foot follows the same pattern.
The third, however, uses the opposite of the anapaest in the corresponding foot of line eleven.
Like Questel, Petrucci has manipulated regular and traditional forms to create an alternative, more effective poem.
Probably the most obvious technique Questel has employed to illustrate the evolvement of traditional English, is that of direct speech.
Although the dramatic scene is introduced to us by 'Rude boy Q', there is no consistent narrator.
As a consequence, the poem is filled with deictics and other common features of speech, such as interruption.
Other than three direct answers, however, the speech of the defendant is no longer included after the first two stanzas, thus interruptions are implied: "Don't interrupt".
Since it is face to face contact there is also implicit physical action: "you snivel in my court"; the poem is dependent on the atmosphere set by the writer through such techniques and dramatic language.
Similarly, Trench demonstrates 'innovational situational development'.
It stands as part of the Imperial War Museum, fixed upon a pillar and involves a superimposed telescopic sight.
This creates a "paratextual space", which allows for the text to become multidimensional.
The readers are reminded of the context of the highly dramatic nature of the poem.
This is reinforced by the internal aspects of the text, such as the consistent use of rhyme, many of which are hard-ended are intended to "emphasise a sniper - like scanning of the eye".
However, it also helps to create the sinister atmosphere of the situation the speaking soldier is in.
This is further enhanced by the "familiar child-like naiveté of the opening lines".
Petrucci has imitated the beginning of the nursery rhyme, Twinkle Twinkle Little Star), which "evokes vulnerability".
The ultimate result of the textual and physical factors of the poem is a creation of "a matrix for reception far more resonant than that of the page alone."
Petrucci has extended the traditional form of the poem into something physical to achieve a far deeper effect on his audience.
Both writers adopt the theme of the manipulation, or 'mutation', of the English language and its various traditional forms.
Despite some similar techniques however, their approaches are very different.
Questel's dramatic piece demonstrates how 'Dread talk' has manipulated language in order to form a Rastafarian identity.
This is achieved through the prosecution of such notions by Judge Dreadword, who appears to hold authority over what is acceptable within the English language.
All four of Petrucci's poems are examples of poeclectics and the 'Re-writing' or mutation of familiar language to create a new sense of meaning.
His re-organisation and manipulation of the familiar illustrate clearly how language can, and has been transformed to give new meaning, as does Questel's own dramatic transformation of the poetic form.
Modernist literature is 'reckoned to be the art of what Harold Rosenburg calls 'the tradition of the new'' and is based around the idea of experimentation, linguistic innovation and the exploration of complex and original ideas.
In Europe the avant-garde, as Modernism was first named, of literature expressed chaos, dysfunction, and a negative, depressing mind frame.
Literature written in the Modernist style shares many characteristics and concepts.
The writers of the Modernist movement share ideas through their literature and use certain techniques to create the desired effect as will be analysed later on in the essay.
Formal and thematic characteristics that work in unison in pieces of modernist literature will be discussed.
Modernist literature stems from the Modernist movement, which is said to have begun with French Symbolism in the mid-nineteenth century and the collapse of naturalism, a French movement in which writers refused to idealise experience and paid close attention to detail and accuracy, creating a representation of 'true' reality.
Modernism is also known as the second generation of 'symbolisme'.
Writers of the literature of both movements used words and phrases accurately chosen for an intensifying effect and there was a strong belief of the symbolic nature of language.
The 'symbolists' such as Arthur Rimbaud, Stéphane Mallarmé, Paul Valéry and Charles Baudelaire believed in indirect expression of dreams and inspiration.
Modernism as a movement followed after romanticism.
An essential principle in literature of Modernism is that imagination is a separate object, an idea also conveyed in romanticism.
However, in Modernism, imagination was seen as being separate from the world set in the writing and the language itself, in contrast to the ideas behind romanticism which suggest the means of expression conveys the subject and world of that subject, the language rather than true expression is used as a means of description rather than a representation of thought.
Modernism is 'characterized by radical experiments with aesthetic time and space and a revolt against 19th-century realism'.
The work of realist writers was seen as outdated encouraging Modernist artists to re-examine essential features of life including religion, philosophy, literature, music, culture and art.
Modernist literature is often seen as working against the style of the realist works by writers such as Jane Austen and Charles Dickens and it breaks away from traditional genre and form.
Modernist prose is greatly compressed, written in a new experimental and intense style of writing using complex time frames and ideas of consciousness.
The prose by modernist authors is so complex it requires the reader's full concentration as if close-reading a piece of poetry or philosophy.
Important names involved with modernism and specifically with modernist literature are Charles Baudelaire, Henry James, Gustave Flaubert, Fyodor Dostoevsky, Emile Zola, Franze Kafka, Marcel Proust.
Writers of English modernist literature include Virginia Woolf, T.S.
Eliot, James Joyce, D.H. Lawrence, Joseph Conrad and Ezra Pound.
Modernism became apparent in English-speaking cultures around 1910.
There became an obvious shift from the neat linear plots and detailed characterisation of nineteenth century literature to literature based on myth, poetic images, and symbols.
The First World War had a major affect on literature written in the countries involved.
The devastating consequences and moral disaster of the War emphasised the cultural chaos and the breakdown and spiritual disintegration of individuals.
This negative and depressing atmosphere was conveyed through pieces of literature, such as T.S.
Eliot's well-known poem 'The Waste Land'.
The piece written conflicts with conventional narrative structure and reveals images, which seem unconnected and fragmented.
The images used are fairly difficult to decode representing the idea of exclusive meanings and elitism, a common feature of modernist literature.
The metaphor of vision is key to the poem, which is another essential idea in modernism.
Modernist writers were much more interested in the workings of the mind than in that of the body and worked at conveying mental images to the reader's intelligence.
'Modernism in literature was characterised by a desire to open up unexplored ares of the mind, including the unconscious realms'.
Psychological and philosophical elements are constantly apparent in modernist works.
Modernist narrative aims to depart from the desires of the body and to express the mind fully.
The writers of this movement tend to focus on small scale ideas rather than the large, such as the indivual in preference to society.
In the writing of modernism there was a clear negativity, an almost depressing air conveyed by the intense combination of words and expressions.
This contrasts sharply to Victorian literature of the nineteenth century and its display of optimism through characterisation, plot and language, an obvious distance from the mostly pessimistic modernist literature.
A chief idea seen running through a good number of modernist fiction is the alienation of the individual of a restless mind and thoughts.
Scepticism towards the notion of truth is a recurring idea in modernism contrasting dramatically with the apparent attempt at revealing the truth in naturalist or realist writing, popular in the nineteenth century.
Another characteristic seen in many modernist pieces is the dissatisfaction with contemporary life and the writers clear pessimistic attitude towards the modern world, which was commonly believed between them to be 'spiritually bankrupt' and 'culturally fragmented'.
Other thematic characteristics involve the breakdown of social norms and tainting of apparent religious certainties.
Modernist writers often detailed about lack of faith and the uncertainty of a 'Godless universe'.
Stream of consciousness is a chief idea in modernist literature and is used by many writers as an essential form of expression.
The reader is plunged into the mind of the character and the feel of uncertainty and an unfamiliar world is felt due to the character's own alienation, unlike familiar scenes captured in realist novels such as Jane Austen's 'Emma'.
These characters are often placed in an urban, dysfunctional society and cityscapes, which deeply affects the thoughts and mind of the individual.
Free verse or vers libre, is a common feature of the Modernist poetry, allowing the writer to express their thoughts in a more liberal and less-restrictive manner.
Furthermore discontinuous narrative, juxtaposition, and unconventional use of language and images are chief characteristics of Modernist literature.
As with the work of Baudelaire, shifts in rhythm and unusual changing of time order and sudden transitions are displayed in modernist works.
Additional key aspects of Modernist literature involve 'open form, a difficult or complex mental landscape, an unreliable narrator and psychological and linguistic repitition, obsession with language, deep introspection, and techinical and formal experimentation'.
A clear way to convey the chief characteristics of Modernist literature is to use an apt example to effectively highlight and analyse in a detailed fashion the way in which the style and techniques of Modernist writers work in conveying the ideas and concepts behind the Modernist movement.
A key text that perfectly exemplifies modernist literature is the novel 'Mrs Dalloway' written by Virginia Woolf.
'Mrs Dalloway' a novel written in 1925 shortly after the end of the first World War fits exactly into the Modernist literary genre and appeared when Modernism had moved to England from the rest of Europe.
It is a well-known example of expressionist and modernist writing.
Woolf aimed to move away from traditional forms of fiction, to come 'closer to life,' to capture the moments of life, good and bad.
Woolf uses a new literary form to effectively express the issues and consciousness of society of post-war England.
Woolf, an influential writer, saw the conventional 'realist' novel as an inadequate form of expression, preferring to use her experimental style of writing about character's disjointed impressions of the world around her and using stream of consciousness to great effect.
There are no gaps or pauses only a continuous on running of the characters thoughts reflecting the true nature of the human mind, a key notion of the Modernist movement.
The complex structure of thoughts and the mind is reflected by the complex structure of the novel.
This idea of the complexity of the human mind and the complexity of life in general conveyed effectively through the loose structure of the plot supports the Modernist view of the inconclusive nature of life and the constant uncertainties that surround us.
Woolf chose not to use chapters but divided her novel in unnamed parts and sections.
An interesting point to note is the conventional unit of time in a Modernist novel is the day, represented in 'Mrs Dalloway' which follows the day of the character Clarissa Dalloway as she prepares for a party in her grand London home.
It empahsises the intensity of experience and portrays the unusual time scheme dealt with in most Modernist works.
Woolf juxtaposes present day thoughts with flash backs and memories and details of the past.
Considering themes dealt with in 'Mrs Dalloway' several clearly run parallel with modernist ideas and other pieces of Modernist literature.
Isolation and alienation of the individual are key issues seen in this post-war novel: This significant line from the novel emphasises the contrast between the chaos of public city life and the quiet privacy of the soul and the protagonist's deep thoughts.
Clarissa, even when she is walking through the crowded streets, considers the essential loneliness of life.
This idea is another link to the modernist's tendency to write about isolation and one's distance from society.
Time and psychology, significant aspects to this novel, are of great interest to modernist writers as mentioned above.
Whilst writing 'Mrs Dalloway', Woolf was reading literature by writers such as James Joyce and Marcel Proust, huge figures in the modernist movement, their influence apparent.
'Mrs Dalloway' attempts to uncover the fragmented thoughts of the characters.
Characters dealt with in modernist literature are often thought- tormented, suffering individuals, as seen in Woolf's novel with Clarissa and Septimus in particular.
She shows the characters' ever-changing thoughts and how they think and reflect as they move through space revealing their reactions to their surroundings.
The unstatic nature of the human mind portrayed here clearly relates to the Modernist writer' s conventional use of stream of consciousness and capturing life in moments of vision.
Woolf wanted to give her characters 'humanity', 'humour' and 'depth', defining them through action and choice.
The Modernist principle of the importance of the mind over the body is obviously portayed in this novel by the merging of thoughts of the characters and complete focus on the conscious.
Each character is never stable but is more like a repertoire of personas rather than a solid individual.
The narrotor in 'Mrs Dalloway' supplies minimal report supporting the modernist literature's use of unreliable narrators and the concept of truth is questioned, contrasting to the realist novel's unquestionable narrotor and notion of truth and reality.
In this novel truths are subjective and changeable, as the plot streams back and forth in space and time.
'Mrs Dalloway' reveals the effects of the war and portrays the nature of the society, which was left in its wake and how the individual was affected by the vast tragedy that was World War One.
As can be seen 'Mrs Dalloway' is a key example of the Modernist novel and displays the chief characterisitcs of Modernist literature, encompassing the main themes and techniques.
As we have just seen in the Modernist style in prose, Modernist poetry is also technically innovative.
Free verse is mainly used to enhance expression and the mental depth of the poems.
The Modernist image in poetry is of a fragmented and isolated nature, where the image of the creative poet relates to the notion of the 'unconscious'.The image used in Modernist pieces of literature represents the imagination rather than to convey symbolic meaning.
A single image is often used in Modernist poetry rather than a compilation of images as Ezra Pound expresses; 'It is better to present one Image in a lifetime than to produce voluminous works'.
The language written in such an open form can appear chaotic but the focus is on the flow of the language and the spatial awareness on the page.
The isolated image is the 'most characteristic feature of Modernist poetry'.
The Modernist belief is that language cannot be trusted as it is unable to directly describe things only hinting at a world seen in the mind.
The poem acts visually on the page and the language and spacial structure reveal a deeper level behind the literature and link heavily to psycho-analysis.
The lack of authority from a narrator works in Modernist writing to open up questions and possible ideas in the mind of the reader and to relate to the unconscious.
Not only does the writing convey a meaning, it allows the reader to think of his own personal reaction to the piece and think of ideas from observing the open form, free-thinking text.
As can be seen there are many characteristics of Modernist writing including poetry and prose, which have been discussed above.
The important movement began in mid-nineteenth century France and influenced many writers in its path through Europe to England.
Modernist literature, a rebellion against realism and rationalism, focused on the idea of expression and the concept and thought process of the mind using many different techniques for different effects.
The psychological work of Sigmund Freud hugely affected the writings in Modernist literature as can be seen through the recurrent themes of time and psychology, and the obsession with language and the true expression of thoughts.
Using Mrs Dalloway as an example above, the chief characteristics of Modernist literature can be seen more clearly.
Unlike the Augustinian poets of the eighteenth century, who strove to provide a generalized picture of experience and emotion, and to bring out what an experience had in common with all other such experiences, the Romantic movement in the nineteenth-century placed an emphasis on confronting 'each reader individually, with a representation of the poet's individuality."
At a time when 'mathematical thinking was the dominant intellectual mode' due to the influence of Isaac Newton's scientific findings, both William Wordsworth and William Blake strove to reach a more natural and humanistic state in their poetry, and to focus 'particularly on those aspects... which transcended or escaped the ordered patternings of mathematical form."
During the nineteenth-century the state of childhood was linked to the 'tender infantile sentiment appropriate to that perennial image of meekness;' therefore in order to get back to what the poets considered to be a 'truer state of humanity' and closer to a child-like state it is natural that the Romantic Poets should hold up the image of youth as an ideal condition, in order to connect more deeply with their reading public.
The representation of childhood in the texts I am looking at is one of purity and goodness.
The child is portrayed as a helpless victim in the face of the social ills which befall him or her, leading to great pain and suffering, and therefore the child is deserving of our pity and compassion.
This has the effect of adding emotional depth to the works which otherwise may seem very simple in composition and style.
Romantic writers were greatly influenced by the changing political states during the eighteenth- and nineteenth-centuries.
The French Revolution had a huge effect in stirring up revolutionary feeling and the opposing fear of revolution in England and, by enlarging horizons in politics and society, 'must have had an equally great effect in enlarging cultural- including poetic- horizons."
This allowed writers to look closely at the more unpleasant elements in society that otherwise might have been glossed-over.
However, an even greater effect was felt from the Industrial Revolution which had been taking place since 1770.
Wordsworth saw the effect of the Industrial Revolution as the weakening of the 'bonds of domestic feeling among the poor,' due to the increase in mechanisation and the division of labour, both leading to a more socially and geographically mobile work force.
This had resulted in a great increase in the marginalized and the dispossessed in society, particularly in the rapidly growing cities, and it was these elements in society that became the main focus of both Wordsworth and Coleridge's 'Lyrical Ballads' and Blake's 'Songs of Innocence and Experience.'
However neither of the works are an explicit political analysis, and neither offer any form of alternative to the state of affairs at the time; instead the emphasis is on the emotional reactions created by social injustice.
Wordsworth and Blake can be said to have differing religious and social ideologies; Henry Crabb Robinson draws attention to 'the reproaches [Blake] continually cast on [Wordsworth's] worship of nature, which, in the mind of Blake, constituted Atheism."
Indeed, Blake went so far as to state 'whoever believes in Nature disbelieves in God."
This goes directly against Wordsworth's belief, influenced greatly by the pantheism of Samuel Taylor Coleridge, that 'truth to nature was the vital precondition for the exercise of poetic imagination."
Wordsworth was 'devoted... to the more substantial spheres of natural beauty and personal feeling' in nature, rather than the worldliness of politics and materialism.
Therefore, whilst the emphasis in 'The Lyrical Ballads' is on the perfection of the natural world, and more importantly, how transcendence may be achieved through contact with the natural world, in Blake's 'Songs of Innocence' and 'Songs of Experience ' the emphasis is much less on nature and more on human emotion, and specifically on the purity of youth.
Despite this difference, the words of Samuel Taylor Coleridge go some way towards bridging the gap between the two poets, as he states that 'innocence and the very truth of Nature must go together."
Therefore many common themes are seen in both poetical works.
In both Wordsworth and Blake's poetry emotion is used to great effect.
Instead of simply telling the reader about human suffering and emotion, they are asking you to feel it.
In Blake's 'The Chimney Sweeper,'  the poet 'makes the reader feel what the child does not."
Therefore whilst Tom may be 'happy and warm' in the knowledge that 'if all do their duty, they need not feel harm,' we as readers are able to see the injustice in a society where a child is forced to state: 'so your chimneys I sweep, and in soot I sleep.
This use of pathos has the effect, although not criticising the state of innocence, of making the reader aware of its limitations.
Similarly, In Wordsworth's 'We are Seven,' the 'simple child' who may 'feel its life in every limb' is apparently incapable of facing the harsh reality and inflexibility of death.
Whilst innocence is a state to be envied, it can be short-sighted in its vision and therefore is likely to be abused.
Critics have suggested that it was Blake's 'feeling of dissatisfaction with the public' that lead him to address children.
Indeed Blake, like Coleridge, showed considerable frustration with 'the worst effects of habitual novel reading,' and was compelled to state: By addressing his 'Songs' to the child, it is like Blake is addressing the uncorrupted, and he shows a 'chameleon-like sympathy with childlike feelings."
John Beer states that 'his most lucid verses are also those which are most gratifying to the sentimental,' and it is by appealing to a reader's compassion and sentiment that Blake's verse has such a powerful effect.
This pathos is clear in 'The Chimney Sweeper,' found in 'Songs of Experience.'
The opening lines: Immediately create a sense of pity for the child, and by focusing on the marginalised in society Blake is poignantly drawing our attention to the suffering.
He uses both alliteration and assonance in the second line with 'weep' and 'woe,' drawing out the vowel sounds to engage the emotion of the reader and to accentuate the pitiable situation of the chimney sweeper.
This is a poem which demands feelings of empathy towards the protagonist.
Blake is pointing out 'the state of innocence and its relationship to the protective but potentially restrictive adult' in this poem, showing how over-zealous but ultimately misguided parents can do great 'injury' to their children by putting the idea of a 'higher good' before the individual.
This underpins the idea that youth can be corrupted and ultimately destroyed by age and experience.
However, as readers we must be cautious of treating 'innocence' and 'experience' as implying opposition; instead, Duncan Wu suggests that we 'think of the two groups as engaging in dialogue."
It is Blake's 'ability to juxtapose different ways of responding to the same situation that characterizes 'Songs of Innocence' and the corresponding lyrics in 'Songs of Experience.'
In his 'Songs' Blake is rejecting the longer Epic style of poetry, seen in works such as 'The Book of Urizen,' in favour of brief, lyrical, more accessible poetic forms.
By adapting popular  forms, Blake has the effect of emphasizing the 'intensity and purity of childhood vision' and leading Alexander Gilchrist to state that as we read Blake's 'Songs' 'fugitive glimpses open...of our buried childhood."
Both he and Wordsworth avoided periphrasis in these poetic works, striving instead for language that was simple and unelaborated, but from the heart.
Blake was said to be 'passionately committed to the tragedy of their period,' and it is by drawing attention to this 'tragedy' of undeserved suffering in simple, unadorned language that he is attempting to encourage others to recognise the ills in society.
The image of the child was widely used in Romantic Literature to represent extreme innocence and purity.
Building on the words of the Bible, in which the uncorrupted nature of a child is taken as the ideal: William Blake uses childhood as a starting point by which to connect more meaningfully with a common core of experience within the reading public.
The sentiments expressed in the above psalm are echoed in 'Infant Joy,' in which he stresses the simple joy of a tiny infant 'but two days old.'
The brief time that the child has spent in the world means that it has not yet been corrupted, and we can see the child in its most natural state: that of happiness.
The structure of the poem reinforces the simplicity of the infant's feeling, with the brevity of the stanzas, the simple rhyme scheme of 'a, b, c, d, d, c,' and the repetition of 'Sweet joy."
The 'Songs' have been described as 'unfinished poems,' and it is this deceptive simplicity, shielding works of 'social and political protest,' which gives them their power.
In his poetry Blake is able to lay emphasis on the god-like qualities he saw in mankind.
In 'A Cradle Song' Blake refers to 'soft down' weaving an 'infant crown;' this echoes images of Christ and a milder version of the crown of thorns.
Similarly, in the fifth stanza the lines: Again reinforces the image of the Christ Child.
This image is completed in the concluding stanzas, when Blake makes his comparison between a baby and Christ explicit: This is reflective of Blake's experience of the Swedenborgian faith, which states that 'God is a man; all angels and spirits are men in a perfect form.'
However Blake eventually rejected this faith as it became increasingly institutionalised, and is using the image of childhood purity - suggesting that to be childlike is the real godlike state.
The fact that the message of this poem echoes the Biblical quote shows that 'no one was more caught up in the ideological, religious and intellectual currents of the day' than Blake himself.
Coleridge and Wordsworth's 'Lyrical Ballads', like Blake's 'Songs,' are largely spoken by the marginalised element in society.
Indeed, In Blake's poetry we see 'the very metre and trick of style adopted by Wordsworth...in the 'Lyrical Ballads."
Wordsworth takes pains to show us the beauty of youth; he describes a boy in 'Anecdote for Fathers' as 'cast in beauty's mould' and as having a face 'fair and fresh to see."
Similarly, in 'We are Seven' a young girl is 'very fair' and 'her beauty made [Wordsworth] glad.'
By idealising youth in this way, Wordsworth is furthering the idea of the childhood state being pure and uncorrupted.
A different representation of the child-like state is seen in Wordsworth's 'The Idiot Boy."
In this poem the central protagonist is an 'idiot boy,' whom Wordsworth defends and even accords an exulted status.
'I have often applied to idiots... that sublime expression of scripture that, "their life is hidden with God."'
Therefore the fact that Johnny Foy remains in a childlike state through adulthood is a blessing, because it affords him a closeness to God unattainable to the adults around him.
Wordsworth talks of Johnny 'in his glory' and he is at no point criticised in the poem for failing to do as he was asked and fetch the doctor.
This reinforces the representation of a childlike state as being one close to a godlike state, seen in the poetry of Blake.
In Blake's poetry, and also in the narrative of slavery, 'The History of Mary Prince,' we are given the idea of the child as voiceless, and the author as giving voice to their sufferings.
Mary Price states: 'All slaves want to be free- to be free is very sweet."
Mary Prince also stresses the innocence of children in her 'History,' by repeatedly referring to her ignorance of her position as a child: 'I was too young to understand rightly my condition as a slave."
In many ways Mary Prince's narrative is formulaic, showing many of the 'common elements' set down in 'I was born a slave."
As such, it presents many aims in common with other narratives of slavery, that is, to document the conditions of slavery, to encourage social change, and to persuade the reader of the evils of being enslaved.
In Mary Prince's account we are presented with a relatively ideal and innocent childhood snatched away by the realities of slave life.
It was 'the happiest period' of her life, in which she was 'too full of spirits to look forward to the days of toil and sorrow,' In this way Prince sets up an opposition between the beauty and innocence of childhood and the pain and toil associated with adulthood.
This is an idea used in Blake's 'Holy Thursday' in 'Songs of Experience.'
He states: These lines show the unjustness of a world in which children are forced to suffer at the hands of selfish adults.
The adults in Mary Prince's account show no pity for the state of childhood; when she was just twelve years old Prince was 'licked, flogged, and pinched' at the pleasure of her mistress, 'whether the children were behaving well or ill." Therefore whilst in both Blake and Wordsworth's poetry youth is something to be cherished and respected, in Mary Prince's world it gained no distinction from adulthood.
'To "delight and instruct" were two standard aims of many eighteenth- and nineteenth-century narrative works' and this aim is clear in both Blake's and Wordsworth's poetry.
However this objective is not made explicit in 'The History.'
In this respect slave narratives differ from the greater body of texts from the Romantic Movement, because their aims were more unambiguously political.
The closing lines of Prince's narrative: 'call loud to the great King of England, till all the poor blacks be given free' make this clear.
The Romantic Wars, as well as the Industrial Revolution, were causing great suffering amongst the poorer demographics in English society at the beginning of the nineteenth-century, and it can be argued that this was a huge contributing factor in compelling the writers I have mentioned above to put their thoughts down in texts.
This can be seen in the many war-wounded characters that feature in Wordsworth's poetry, such as in 'The Female Vagrant,' and 'Old Man Travelling."
In order to increase the emotional effect these writings are to have on readers, the use of the child is fundamental, as you cannot argue that it is the actions of the child itself that has lead to their pitiable situation.
Therefore by representing a child as being all that is pure, good, and innocent, and using that image to elicit sympathy in the reading public, Blake, Wordsworth, and Prince are appealing to their audiences' better natures and, particularly in Prince's case, calling for social change.
The preface to this book first needs to be examined on its own to make sure the reader first understands exactly what Montaigne is declaring.
'To the Reader' is saying that the essays are not written to reach a wide audience, but merely for his close friends and family to have a way of remembering him more effectively when he has died.
Montaigne does not intend to try and impress his readers, but purely intends to show the reader his views on many aspects of society 'you will read of my defects and my native form so far as respect for social convention allows'.
Most importantly Montaigne asks that the reader trusts what is written in the book.
Having examined what the preface states, it is important to remember Montaigne's above points upon the reading of his following chapters, for it will undoubtedly influence the way we process and assimilate the information in our heads.
I think the preface of any book is important whether work of fiction or fact, and can be wrongly ignored as I myself have done in eagerness to attack the main text.
The preface enables us to understand the authors' intentions for his piece of writing, and in the case of The Complete Essays is extremely important due to it being a work of fact.
It tells us exactly why Montaigne decided to share his views with us, but that they are his views and should not be treated as anything else.
With this in mind, the first chapter I intend to examine is chapter eighteen; On Fear.
After first reading the chapter, one could be forgiven for questioning some of the examples Montaigne uses to demonstrate the different types of fear.
This is especially true of the modern day reader, seeing as most of the examples come from the middle of wars, a topic the average person today would be unfamiliar with except for if he desired to read about it.
Examples of two large troops of soldiers taking fright and 'fleeing to the place where the other had just fled from' or a lone soldier running towards his enemy only to have 'realised what he was doing and headed back through the very same gap out of which he had...dashed' sound farfetched, but if we are to read this in the context of the preface, we must believe it to be true.
We can also infer that some or all of these experiences mentioned in the chapter are personal ones, as the preface states Montaigne intended to write for 'the private benefit of my friends and kinsmen'.
This being so is it possible Montaigne picked the juiciest personal examples he could think of so as to allow his audience to 'find here again some traits of my character and of my humours'?
This shows the importance of the preface for without it we would not be so sure as to whom his target audience was and why he possibly chose the examples he did.
The readers present in Montaigne's lifetime, having probably lived through battles of some sort, and hearing fables of such cowardly deeds would probably believe the stories of fear and be more likely to take them at face value.
Fellow readers of Montaigne's social status would probably, based on the preface, use the book as a way to remember him , or use it as a way to learn about his thoughts and views on all elements of society,  if they did not.
For people lower in society who could read and were able to obtain a copy of the text the principles of what they were able to learn from the book would probably be the same.
The importance of the preface here, is that for those readers who did not know Montaigne, they could take his word and believe that what they were reading was true, yet apparently not exaggerated.
Montaigne also endears the reader to him by implying in the preface he is too humble for them to waste their time reading about him, and that the chapters are really the musings of a 'simple, natural' man.
This could have the reverse effect of making people read the book to find out why he states this, so in this way the preface is actually being used as a way to entice people to read The Essays.
Montaigne states in the preface that this is 'a book whose faith can be trusted' and does not 'seek the favour of the world'.
These statements are strengthened by the content of the chapter being looked at, he does a good job of cataloguing and ordering the different types of fear we humans experience.
He talks of fear that 'puts wings at our heels' but also of fear that 'hobbles us and nails our feet to the ground' using humorous examples to keep the mood light.
However, all these examples are taken from military escapades, which for someone trying to understand fear in a situation outside of war is not too helpful.
Montaigne does state though 'I leave aside simple folk for whom fear sometimes conjures up visions of their great-grandsires rising out of their graves..." showing he has thought about other types of fear, but prefers to rely on his own views , of fear in war, for it is in soldiers that 'fear ought to be able to find very little room."
Based on the confident and seemingly correct manner in which Montaigne categorises fear in this chapter, the reader would be more inclined to read other chapters believing that its writings can be trusted, as the author claims will be the case in the preface, so the content has indeed backed up the claim.
Moving on to chapter fifty-five; On smells, I intend to examine how important the preface is in relation to this section.
Obviously, the main statement that carries through across the whole book is that we must have faith in what is written.
However, because this chapter is about something we smell but cannot see, we must,  interpret it in a slightly different light.
In the chapter about fear, although it is also something we cannot see, it is easier to follow Montaigne's train of thought because he makes statements that categorize the emotion.
In this chapter detailing smells, he makes more bold statements such as that of 'when people give off odours that are not their own, we may rightly suspect them', implying he agrees with the later Latin phrase, 'a man who always smells nice, Posthumous, actually stinks'.
As a modern reader, I would have to disagree with this line of argument as it is the norm for people to scent themselves everyday.
However, I know from the preface though that Montaigne is merely expressing his views for others to see, not attempting to force his views onto the reader, as could be implied if one skipped the preface, or if Montaigne had simply not bothered to write one.
The chapter starts off compiling information about smells but does quickly become a more personal account when Montaigne talks of how his moustache attracted scents so that they 'linger there all day'.
Without the preface, this section could be read and questioned as to how relevant it really is, , but fortunately we know from the preface to expect this and every other chapter to possibly be filled with such personal stories.
I have argued within this essay that the preface is important for our appreciation of The Essays as it gives us a 'heads up' as to what to expect.
However, let us examine the counterargument which would imply the preface is not important in our reading of the book.
'To the Reader' tells us what to expect in every chapter; personal opinions, honest questions and answers, no flamboyant or outrageous ramblings in search of fame and praise.
All this basically means though is that we are at a slightly greater advantage than if we had to find these things out for ourselves.
Based on Montaigne's style of writing it would be fairly clear after reading a portion of the book that these are his views on elements of culture and society.
Many of the titles even begin with 'on', which the reader would soon latch on to as being, ' on...' Perhaps the only drawback could be said to be that the reader may at first feel as if Montaigne is trying to steadily force a change of views in the reader, but would this last the entire book?
I think not.
It seems then the preface is something that is there for the author's peace of mind, something that enables him to happily know he has explained why the book has been written, and that it is up to the reader to take notice of it.
Nevertheless, to avoid confusion over authors' intentions which implies that the preface is important, perhaps every book should have one, that way there can be no room for any misunderstandings.
Form is the opposite of 'paraphrasable content'; it means how something is said as opposed to what is said.
It can also be interpreted as genre or literary type, in this case the novel form.
That said, in his 'Ulysses, Order and Myth' T. S. Eliot dismisses the novel form as 'simply the expression of an age which had not sufficiently lost all form to feel the need of something stricter'.
The quote from Eliot in the essay question refers to the 'mythical method' - a form that consists of parallels linking the ancient past and the chaotic present.
He argues that the novel form is unsuitable for accurately representing the experience of modern life, 'because the era that made it possible is undergoing a crisis and has been transformed into 'a panorama of futility and anarchy''.
In part agreement to Eliot, this essay proposes that during the modern era fiction began to abandon imposed form in an attempt to express the freedom of contemporary life.
But it does not reject all form per se; Alan Friedman notes that 'since the taut and highly conceptualized structures of James, we are often confronted by a fiction whose frames, while mattering greatly, are largely hidden'.
In the essay I am going to consider: 1) logical progression and conclusion , 2) choice of narrator, 3) the motif, 4) stream of consciousness and 5) form as genre in Conrad's Heart of Darkness, Ford's The Good Soldier and Joyce's A Portrait.
A more encompassing definition of form includes structural and textural form.
Structure is the plot, story or argument of a text, while texture refers to diction, syntax and metre.
'Since structure is a matter of arrangement, it includes the formal ordering of the content in time', and this leads us to examine form as a means of ordering the experience of modern life.
E. M. Forster's definition of a story as chronological, a 'narrative of events arranged in their time sequence', renders it the most basic method of ordering experience.
In contrast, modernist texts tend to reject the simple form of the story.
Instead many employ a non-chronological or fugal time sequence - this is certainly true for The Good Soldier and A Portrait.
Although the latter traces Stephen's life experiences chronologically, from childhood through adolescence to maturity, these are punctuated by flashbacks and reflections.
The Good Soldier meanwhile deliberately disorders the experience of modern life.
Its structure is best described as random and fragmented, as Dowell forewarns in chapter 2; In fact he attempts both simultaneously, resulting in confusion and obscurity.
But rather than being a sign of Ford's inadequate authorial skill, this illustrates that modern life is too chaotic  to make sense of by attempting to order it.
Likewise, the structural and textural form of A Portrait is broken up by allusion and documentation, for example extracts from nursery rhymes, songs, or from the bible, and references to Shelley and Nash.
At one point there is a letter format, as Stephen imagines writing a short letter to his mother, and his diary extract in the last chapter is not to be forgotten.
Therefore Aristotle's notion of a linear beginning-middle-end plot sequence is absent from all three texts.
Conrad and Ford criticise the novel form for being 'straight forward, whereas in your gradual making acquaintance with your fellows you never do go straight forward'.
Alternatively Conrad, Ford and Joyce express the experience of modern life as a continual cycle.
Heart of Darkness is in its most literal sense a journey that ends where it starts.
The crew on board the Nellie are stationary throughout and consequently do not make any progress.
Although Marlow progresses psychologically through a journey into the self, his physical journey is still mapped by a cycle, from the Thames to the Belgian Congo and back.
In The Good Soldier the reader is told the final outcome at the beginning; we are informed of Florence's death no later than in the second paragraph, of Edward's in the fourth, and of the affair by the fourth page.
In this respect the beginning-middle-end structure is reversed.
Towards the end of his narrative Dowell remarks 'so here I am very much where I started thirteen years ago', indicating that despite all that has happened he has made little if any situational progress.
The cycle structure adopted by the texts is significant, as it reflects Eliot's concerns about the futility of contemporary history.
The only meaningful progression, if any, is personal and psychological, perhaps at the expense of societal progress.
A cyclical pattern is clear in A Portrait, as Stephen's process of self-realisation is structured by a series of epiphanies - recurring flashes of intellectual clarity linked to a sense of light.
Each chapter builds up to the epiphany as a final climax, only to be undermined in the next chapter.
For example in a prostitute's 'warm and lightsome' room at the end of chapter 2 Stephen feels as though 'he had suddenly become strong and fearless and sure of himself'.
Yet at the beginning of chapter 3 we are told that 'the stars began to crumble' and 'a cold lucid indifference reigned in his soul'.
The fact that the truth is only seen momentarily , and that it can turn out to be false, supports the concept of partial reality.
Similarly the message integral to Heart of Darkness, 'The horror!
The horror!
', is described as 'the appalling face of a glimpsed truth'.
Partiality is a significant issue in modernist texts, and is foregrounded by the use of first-person narrators.
For example The Good Soldier's narrator John Dowell is considerably unreliable and one of the least knowledgeable characters in the story he is telling.
By using an unreliable narrator Ford dissociates both himself as author from his protagonist and us as reader from the story, an effect Conrad also reaches, but by different means.
The opening of Heart of Darkness is spoken by an anonymous frame narrator to distance the reader from Marlow's story, including its implied message from Kurtz.
In both cases the reader is placed further from the truth, and on a more general note this amplifies concerns about certainty in modern society.
The lack of resolution in the texts has a similar disconcerting effect.
A Portrait has no definite ending, as Stephen is preparing for exile, but it starts with one of the most clichéd openings; 'Once upon a time...'.
The Good Soldier finishes moments before Edward Ashburnham's death, something Dowell seems to add merely as an afterthought.
Heart of Darkness ends by returning to the darkness - 'the tranquil waterway...seemed to lead into the heart of an immense darkness'.
Conrad's ending is disconcerting, particularly as he uses darkness to symbolise obscurity and uncertainty.
The light/dark contrast runs throughout the novel, and it is to the concept of theme as a means of structural cohesion that we will now turn.
A motif - a recurring theme, image, idea or symbol - can be an aspect of structural or textural form.
Joyce uses many in A Portrait, such as the epiphany that has already been discussed.
Another is water; in the first chapter Stephen plays with the hot and cold taps, and remembers the cold, slimy water in the square ditch.
The aromatic motif of the 'smell of air and rain'  is repeated much later in the phrase 'fair rainfragrant hair' , and in the last chapter a cup of tea reminds Stephen of 'the dark turfcoloured water of the bath in Clongowes'.
The motif links ideas thematically rather than logically, and it closely coincides with the stream of consciousness technique that can be identified in The Good Soldier and A Portrait.
Ezra Pound's instruction to 'make it new' led to the emergence of experimental literary forms, a defining feature of modernism.
An example of an organic form to originate from the modernist era is stream of consciousness; a technique that aims to capture the 'incessant shower of innumerable atoms'  that are caught by 'an ordinary mind on an ordinary day'.
The form's emphasis on an interior monologue is related to Freud's theory of psychoanalysis at the time, particularly the concepts of the unconscious mind and free association.
For example, A Portrait opens in medias res  with the beginning of a nursery story.
Stephen then recalls that 'his father told him that story: his father looked at him through a glass: he had a hairy face'.
The sentence is broken up by colons into snatches of information that resemble rapid flashes of thought.
These sentence fragments cannot be located in a time or place, but are instead connected by their subject , and succeed in creating a rough sketch of his appearance and relationship to Stephen.
Yet as there is no instruction from an omnipotent narrator to the reader, it is harder to separate Stephen's internal perception from the external action.
The absence of a controlling narrator leads us to modernism's preference for showing rather than telling, or in other terms; 'dramatized narration compared with the renarrating Plato called pure diégesis'.
Plato and Aristotle contrasted diégesis with mimesis - eliminating narratorial commentary so that 'readers feel they are being shown the events and the characters, not merely being told about them'.
Henry James held this as an ideal in modern narratology.
In some respects Conrad and Ford do not conform to this ideal, as the reader is constantly aware of the narrator's presence.
Conrad uses a layered frame narration and significantly breaks the frame on more than one occasion.
This foregrounds the act of story-telling, something Ford does through the self-conscious narration in The Good Soldier.
Dowell frequently refers to his position as narrator and explicitly directs his story to a narratee; 'You, the listener, sit opposite me.
But you are so silent.
You don't tell me anything'.
Imposing a story on a silent listener might seem more in tune with the concept of telling  rather than the theory of mimesis.
But at the same time Heart of Darkness and The Good Soldier use a first-person character-as-narrator, meaning they play integral roles in the stories they tell.
This is important, as the immediacy of this type of narration is truer to our experience of life.
Another point to make here is that the first-person narrator is able to articulate his or her personal experience of modern life.
An emphasis on the self rather than society is a key feature of modernity, and this manifests itself in the modern novel through 'psychological realism' as opposed to 'social realism'.
Conrad, Ford and Joyce concentrate on the inner minds of their protagonists, often in isolation from their social circumstances.
On returning from his journey Marlow recollects; These lines suffice to highlight the tension between the individual and society in Conrad's Heart of Darkness, an opposition marked by the separate pronouns 'I' and 'they'.
Not only is Marlow alienated from others by his knowledge, he sees society as a threat, describing anonymous passers-by as trespassers and intruders.
Similarly, in The Good Soldier Dowell tells us he has exempted himself from social interaction; 'I don't like society - much... No one visits me for I visit no one'.. And finally in the closing pages of A Portrait Stephen affirms to Cranly; 'I will not serve that in which I no longer believe, whether it call itself my home, my fatherland, or my church'.
As a result of disillusionment he no longer sees himself as a part of these social structures.
An importance on the self rather than society is also reflected in the egoistic language present in all three texts.
The term could be applied to the last quote taken from Heart of Darkness.
In The Good Soldier Dowell imagines that his experience is on the same scale as 'the sack of a city or the falling to pieces of a people'.
And during the sermon on hell and punishment in A Portrait, Stephen feels as though 'every word of it was for him.
Against his sin, foul and secret, the whole wrath of God was aimed'.
However, perhaps the aim is not merely to be egocentric, but to accurately represent what it feels like.
Finally, Conrad, Ford and Joyce emphasize character rather than plot.
Proceeding the modern era many realist texts exhibit a carefully structured plot, but often at the expense of their characters.
Here Forster's separation of character into 'flat' and 'round' is helpful.
Round characters are a closer representation of real people, and capture our multiple or fragmented identities in modern life.
The protagonists of the three texts in question all fall into the 'round' category.
In Heart of Darkness one of the central themes is the alter-ego or the dark side of the self.
Like society as a whole, character is no longer static or absolute.
It is left up to the reader to decide if characters can be labelled as good or bad for example.
In the decline of a moral code in modern society, the distinction has become blurred.
In The Good Soldier Leonora is called the 'slightly deceitful' heroine, an antithetical phrase considering a hero or heroine is defined by noble qualities.
The same issue is present in Heart of Darkness, as neither Marlow nor Kurtz embody the traditional heroic figure.
In many respects Kurtz can be seen as an anti-hero, for he is described to us as being in a state of fatal self-destruction.
It is interesting that Joyce discarded his title Stephen Hero, an earlier draft of A Portrait.
Perhaps this is because the hero is inextricably linked to the epic or re-telling form of narration.
Let us look at form in relation to genre, for example the classifications of tragedy/comedy/satire or the modes of lyric/epic/dramatic.
To structuralist critics each genre has a specific set of codes and formal characteristics, and these help generate reader expectations.
That said, modernist texts deliberately aim to break reader expectations.
In the modern era traditional rigid forms, and this includes genre codes and characteristics, are seen as constraining and unhelpful in expressing reality.
This literary anarchy is justified by Virginia Woolf in her essay on 'Modern Fiction', she states; 'if a writer...could base his work upon his own feeling, and not upon convention, there would be no plot, no comedy, no tragedy, no love interest or catastrophe in the accepted style'.
Significantly in The Good Soldier Dowell rejects the title of 'The Ashburnham Tragedy'.
He calls his narration instead 'The Saddest Story', 'just because it is so sad...
There is about it none of the elevation that accompanies tragedy; there is about it no nemesis, no destiny'.
Here he stresses that the story is not planned or structured, unlike fictional tragedy, into acts of exposition, rising action, climax, falling action and dénouement or catastrophe.
Instead The Good Soldier consists of the coincidental tragedy of real life.
Texts can also be separated into the sub-genres of lyrical, epic and dramatic forms.
Joyce experiments by using all three in A Portrait to create a multi-faceted reality.
Through his protagonist Stephen Dedalus, Joyce describes the dramatic form as an artistic ideal; 'the esthetic image in the dramatic form is life purified in and reprojected from the human imagination'.
In this form 'the personality of the artist...finally refines itself out of existence, impersonalizes itself, so to speak'.
In comparison, Stephen sees the lyrical form as simply 'an instant of emotion' , similar to the emphasis on sensations and emotional states at the beginning.
In contrast the middle of A Portrait closely resembles the epic form.
There is more of a focus on external action, such as the full sermon on hell, but importantly Stephen is still at the centre of this.
On a textural scale, the sentences become more complex and fluid, rather than the short fragments of the first chapter.
By manipulating form and style Joyce traces Stephen's intellectual and emotional progress, through lyric, epic and finally dramatic form.
The diary section at the end of the last chapter attempts to reach Joyce's ideal form of art.
It is interesting that his idea of the dramatic form differs from its established definition - traditionally in drama the characters do all the talking, but in Stephen's diary extract there is no recognisable direct speech.
Nevertheless this first-person, organic form functions as a precursor to the stream of consciousness technique Joyce perfected in Ulysses.
All the aspects of form this essay has considered relate to an ideological contrast in the break from the stable past to an uncertain future.
This brings us back to Eliot's 'mythical method' introduced in the question.
In particular Heart of Darkness links the ancient past and chaotic present; Africa is like 'the earliest beginnings of the world' , whereas in the 'sephulchral city' 'people are hurrying through the streets' .
The immediacy of the closing diary format of A Portrait separates past from present by grounding the rest of the story firmly in the past.
It makes sense then, if the modern present is so different from the past, to use a different quality of form to express our experience of it.
Imposed form is inept for ordering or articulating life as it is now understood - 'a mysterious arrangement of merciless logic for a futile purpose'.
This essay aims to explore the linguistic techniques employed in Edward Thomas' 'The Long Small Room', in order to gain a fuller understanding of the text.
In the poem, the persona  seems to be speculating about age and reflecting on the past.
Perhaps as a result of this, the tone is melancholic.
The last quatrain differs from the three preceding it in terms of subject matter, tense and degree of metaphorical language.
This enables the persona to contemplate the themes of age and the passing of time in more detail.
Firstly though, let us consider the title.
'The Long Small Room' is an unusual collocation, because 'long' and 'small' contradict each other semantically.
If a room is long, it is likely to also be described as big, rather than small.
The fact that the room in the poem is long and small implies it is out of proportion and out of the ordinary, as indeed it is.
Another point to make here is that length tends to be associated with width.
In this case 'the long narrow room' might be an appropriate substitute, although this might ruin the simplicity of the title.
The term 'narrow' is disyllabic rather than monosyllabic, and arguably not as neutral in this context.
Together 'long' and 'narrow' generate a tunnel-like image and a sense of claustrophobia, more so than 'long' and 'small'.
'The long small room' is the presumed centre of the text; not only is it the title of the poem, but also the first quatrain describes it, the characters look in on it, and the focus of the third quatrain is what happened there.
Or, more specifically, the centre and main subject matter of the text is simply a room.
In the first line 'room' is the head of the noun group.
'Long' and 'small' are its pre-modifiers, and 'that showed willows in the west' is a post-modifying phrase.
To decentre the text, one might want to draw attention to the 'willows in the west'.
These are mentioned in the first and last lines of the poem, a technique that adds structure to the text and at the same time suggests a cycle.
It is interesting that Thomas chose to mention willows in place of any other tree.
Some people might associate these with the weeping willow and therefore the act of crying.
Indeed, Thomas applies the verb 'stream' to the leaves on the willow tree; this is emphasised by the assonance in 'leaves stream'.
This phrase also connotes crying, as tears can be described as 'streaming', or 'a stream of tears'.
A sense of sorrow is also conveyed through the poem phonetically.
In the first and forth quatrains, repetition of the 'oh' sound mimics the sound of sighing, for example the assonance in 'showed willows', and pillow/willow are end rhymed in the forth quatrain.
There is also initial rhyme between 'narrowed' and 'although' in the second and third lines.
It may be significant that the long small room looks out onto the west where the sun sets, as this suggests a place in time nearer the end of a cycle.
The concluding line of the poem mentions the 'last leaves', perhaps a sign that it is winter and reaching the end of the year.
This sense of coming to the end of a cycle is related to the themes of age and time that are present more generally in the text.
On the other hand, in the forth quatrain there are also references to beginnings.
For example the 'clean white page' and 'each morning on the pillow' both create the sense of a new start, and for the latter the beginning of a cycle.
It is clear the long small room is a memory; this is implied by the phrase 'when I look back', as well as the fact that the first three quatrains are mainly in past tense.
'There' in the second quatrain also helps to distance the experience.
If the second quatrain was rewritten in the present tense it might look something like this; This repositions the reader so that they are in the room amongst the action.
At the same time the room looses some of its intrigue and mystery.
If the description of the room is relayed to the reader in past tense, it makes it easier for us to alienate.
There is a shift in temporal dimension from the third quatrain to the forth.
The dash in the last line of the third quatrain indicates a significant change in thought, separating the line both visually and conceptually.
It is followed by 'this', a more direct representation of experience than 'that'.
The progressive participles 'crawling', 'resting' and 'starting' indicate that the first three lines of the forth quatrain are in the most immediate tense, the continuous present.
If the tense was shifted to the generalising 'state' present, these lines might look as follows; This dimension creates a stronger sense of routine than the '-ing' form, but does not produce the same extent of contrast between the third and forth quatrains.
In the third the reader assumes that the persona is 'like moon, sparrow, and mouse' in that he or she also 'witnessed what [he/she] could never understand...'.
There is an unexpressed causation here, but the structure of the text implies that like the other characters, the persona is a helpless bystander to the action.
In marked contrast, in the subsequent stanza the persona participates in and directly manipulates the action.
In the concluding lines of the second quatrain, 'shall' projects into the future, and so does 'the old ivy and old er brick'.
Here there is a direct comparison, as the second adjective is an extended and intensified version of the first.
This would be lost if 'older' was replaced by a synonym, for example 'ancient'.
'Old' also relates thematically to the rest of the poem, as  it is commonly used to describe people.
The metaphors in the poem are concentrated in the last quatrain, for instance 'crawling crab-like' and 'leaves stream'.
These examples are both foregrounded through sound patterning.
The initial 'c' alliteration in 'crawling crab-like' binds together the concept of crawling and the image of a crab, particularly as the alliterated syllables are stressed.
It suggests a gradual process, and the comparison to a crab connotes brittle joints - these are both aspects of age.
Using 'crawling' on its own, or 'crawling child-like' instead might create a different effect of youth and agility, and therefore contradict the theme of ageing.
Up to this point there is little figurative language, and in this way the last quatrain is set apart from the rest of the poem.
To sum up, the subject matter of the first three quatrains is mainly concrete.
The poem mentions tangible objects such as a room, a house, a fireplace and a page in a book - these are all concrete nouns.
On the other hand, the focus of the last quatrain  is an abstract concept.
Consequently, this stanza is more general.
Unlike the others the thoughts expressed in it are not tied to a specific time and place.
And perhaps most significantly, the immediate tense makes the action continuous and indefinite, rather like the daily routine of life itself.
Graphologically it appears that the passage is a poem as it takes the form of one unrhymed stanza.
Amalgamating assorted structural principles without establishing a single consistent pattern suggests that it is free verse as it lacks metrical, syllabic and rhythmic regularity.
Phonologically, declarative syntactic structures create a colloquial, prosaic tone that is forfeited by using the past tense and enumerated instances of reported speech.
Repeatedly using the third person singular pronoun 'he,' produces both ambivalence and distance, as we never discover who 'he' is.
This barrier is sustained through problematic reporting clauses such as 'this man said,' as the demonstrative article 'this,' generates a sense of specificity that is instantly eroded by the ambiguity of referring to him only as 'man.'
Speculation regarding the nature of 'his' character, history and actions therefore becomes unavoidable.
The visual image; 'All bent their heads,' implies a sense of loss and mourning that suggests the occurrence of a death.
Predominantly monosyllabic words in the final three lines reinforce this by creating a slow, sombre pace.
Allusions to 'Carthage' and 'Genghis Kahn' provide historical register and collocations relating to 'guns' and 'death,' evoke images of battles and war which may imply that 'he' is a military leader, accountable for sending others to death.
Alternatively; 'he was smart with his elbows, then used his fists', coupled with allusions to 'conquered' and 'blood' suggest that 'he' is a victorious guilt-ridden boxer, possibly responsible for unintentionally killing his opponent.
Such culturally encoded deductions are highly dependent on the individual's contextual knowledge, but certain intimations and evocations have led me to adopt the latter interpretation in my analysis.
The voice of an external narrator pervades the verse, possibly a boxing commentator, who is established as wise and astute through knowing truths such as; 'But of course there are things you can't wash off.'
This statement initiates the protagonist's seeming submergence in self-reproach by conjuring an image of Lady Macbeth's repeated hand washing in Macbeth.
The metaphor; 'the ant-swarm of the transistors crawled through his ears,' can be read as a figurative representation of the problematic erasure of guilt.
Fricative sibilant /s/ sounds in 'transistors' generates a sinister hissing that may mirror the consistent reverberation of remorse through his mind.
The accompanying blunt and harsh dental plosive /t/ sounds demonstrates the impossibility of silencing these echoes.
Eliding the words 'ant-swarm' creates a compound noun that juxtaposes the diminutive and substantial properties of each word in order to depict how minor pricks of guilt can escalate.
Sound symbolism creates aural interest in the absence of conventional rhyming patterns.
The mimetic phoneme properties of the long vowel / /sound in 'crawled,' aurally and visually enacts the ability of shame and horror to creep relentlessly through the mind.
Personifying the air by imbuing it with sight in; 'the seeing air was stunned' engenders a palpable aura of paranoia.
Depicting a boundless, ubiquitous force continually watching him conveys a sense of inescapability from his actions, making the weight of culpability an oppressive and ominous force.
The stative verb 'stunned' effectively utilizes the past tense to underline the irreversibility of what has happened as it lacks potential for change.
It simultaneously implies something far more dramatic than the loss of 'a little blood,' fortifying the insinuations of inadvertent death that permeate the poem.
The pre-modifying adjective 'little' hedges the usual violent properties associated with 'blood' making his reversion to continually repeating; 'a little blood' a method of soothing his conscience by down playing what 'he' has done, an effect fortified by the vague and colloquial properties of; 'more or less.'
Alliterative consonance and repetition in; 'strong, so strong' augments his vigour, but unexpectedly juxtaposing it against the parallel opposite 'weakness' implies a façade that intimates that he is not 'great and strong' but vulnerable.
Structural parallelism provides the poem's most arresting yet frustrating feature.
A litany of progressively outrageous similes beginning; 'Clean as the,' force the reader to search for the semantic connections between the divergent images depicted.
The accumulation of markedly more contradictory, antithetical concepts makes the poem appear designed to confuse.
This allows us a sense of shared understanding with the poem's otherwise disconnected protagonist; he too appears engulfed by bewilderment, struggling like the reader to comprehend what is happening and being said.
'When he spoke he guzzled the words of others,' becomes an abnormal paradigm suggestive of disorientation as speech is normally an outward projection.
This paradox and the unexpected active verb; 'guzzled' depicts him struggling to take things in, possibly reeling from the weight of his actions trying to gain clarity and balance, making him appear overwhelmed and shocked.
'Pure as the sperm of Genghis Kahn' interrupts the established pattern through internal lexical deviation, generating further destabilization to reinforce the thematic centrality of confusion.
'Clean as the conscience of a gun' is a problematic, incongruous personification as guns are inextricably linked to death, something tainted not clean.
De-familiarising meaning through ironic perversions of the customary affirmative associations connected to 'clean,' may be demonstrative of how an innocent sport can become deadly, destructing goodness and promise through injury and death.
Half-rhyme plosive sound parallelism arising from forceful bi-labial 'p' sounds in 'spore' and 'sperm,' draw our attention the semantic connection between them.
Both have unyielding capacity for growth, but connecting the spore to the menace of 'anthrax,' corrupts it with infectious poisonous properties, continuing the motif of shattered potential.
Placing the adjective 'unnecessary' before 'battle' fortifies this suggesting wasted lives, blood and energies, making the poem a possible attack on the dangers of boxing.
Referring to 'tampons' conveys how 'a little blood' can have huge significance by alluding to the menstrual cycle, an event that like an untimely death is associated with the end of innocence.
Enjambment and indentation creates a graphological space that becomes a stressed silence forcing us to pause on 'wept,' as placing it alone makes us question why it is foregrounded.
As a transitive dynamic verb it animates movement, creating a visual image of blood dripping down in a tear-like manner while possibly mirroring the boxer's opponent's fall.
'Wept' has powerful emotive nuances that evoke a sense of overwhelming pain enabling it to act in a modal capacity as an intensifier that contradicts the preceding adjective 'little.'
Small letters begin the final two lines creating external deviation; refusing to adhere to the expected pattern reflects the abandonment of order to feeling, a compositional fragmentation that replicates the boxer's inferred emotional disintegration.
Closing with an end stop provides an illusive sense of structural completion but fails to remove the reader's lingering sense of confusion as 'his' identity and action is never actually disclosed.
At the time of writing Othello, Shakespeare's knowledge of tragedy would have been largely dependent upon ancient Greek drama.
This genre of performance was deeply ritualised and frequently based on events in the religious calendar, aimed at the Gods.
They believed that tragedy was in their hands and that anyone who transgressed their laws would suffer vengeance as a result.
These performances are thought to have presented true humility and a sense of the human character.
They portrayed humanity as fallible, and Othello is definitely similar to the Greek tragedies in the sense that all of the characters are liable to make mistakes.
This essay will explore the extent to which Shakespeare applied Aristotle's principles of tragedy to Othello, and specifically examine the reasons for Desdemona's tragedy.
In the third century BC Aristotle attempted to differentiate between the different genres of writing, and he came up with five main principles of tragedy.
The first point stated that "Tragedy is the representation of an action that is worth serious attention, complete in itself".
By this he meant that it is not dependant on its characters and more focused on the actual plot.
The play would always display a unity and wholeness, with the action as a complete thing, with all of the strings tied up in the final scene.
In relation to Shakespeare's tragedy, Othello is a highly concentrated and controlled play.
Very few of the scenes loosen from the plot and the action focuses heavily on it.
The great attention to action is heightened through the claustrophobia created in Othello.
This is a unique sensation in Shakespeare's plays and is created as the attention becomes fixed on a single bedroom, which is where the final tragedy occurs.
This is heightened by the fact that there is no subplot, which intensifies the dramatic tension as the audience doesn't get a single moment to look away from Iago's progress, as he pushes Othello towards tragedy.
This is added to by the fact that the audience is aware that they are observing a group of characters who exist in a tightly knit social network, where each person has a clearly defined role and a view of each member of the group.
Iago threatens the order and harmony of this network because he is able to manipulate characters' views.
The language used relates to this point as it helps to carry the story forward.
This is especially true of the leading character, Othello is gifted with the power of good speech and his tales of military feats gives a sense of action.
The characters psychology is also reflected in language, as Othello's suffering increases his lines become more contorted, "O Desdemon!
Dead Desdemon!
Dead!
O!
O!".
The sense of action and conflict is also created through the war with the Turks.
Although this is isn't the main focus of the tragedy it is a factor of movement, as it is what moves the cast to a new setting.
However, Othello does deviate from this principle in one way as, unlike in Greek drama, Shakespeare centers action on the individual.
This tragedy is focused on the psychology of its characters and this is what creates the action, the movement of the play follows the movement of their thoughts.
Aristotle's second point is of reversal, discovery and calamity.
Through this the audience follows the process of the leading character coming to understand their fate as they are overturned, and a tragedy is presented at the end of the play.
He noted that the discovery was often the most poignant or awful stage in the play, which created sympathy and/or empathy in the audience.
Like many of these dramas, this play began hopefully with the newly blossomed love between Othello and Desdemona, they were looking forward to a happy and peaceful future together.
This was when Othello was at the height of his prowess, both with women, and his position professionally, as he was a highly sought-after member of the military forces, and a name to admire.
This status makes the reversal even more poignant.
As the discovery occurs his name falls apart.
It is interesting to note that 'O' at the beginning and end of his name reflects his calamity at the end of the play, exclaiming 'O, O' as his attempts to remedy his actions are ultimately irredeemable.
The third point is that tragedies include both pity and fear.
Aristotle stated that "the plot ought to be so constructed that, even without the aid of an eye, he who hears the tale told will thrill with horror and melt to pity at what takes place".
These contradictory emotions are often wrapped up in religion and fear of the Gods.
The audience often pities the protagonist's dilemma.
In many ways Shakespeare does apply this theory to Othello, yet there is little reference to the Gods.
However, there is still a large focus on fate, and how the characters are unable to escape from it.
The play explores the ways in which different people make sense of events in their lives, including what they merely imagine to be happening.
Often their fate is set by the social concepts of the time; for example, it could be suggested that Desdemona's death was inevitable due to the view of women in that era.
It makes the audience consider the ways in which certain events are 'fated' to us, but the reaction towards the plot of Othello doesn't just include fear and pity.
The power of this play as a tragedy is founded in its ability to make the audience recognise how much it shares as human beings with the characters because of a fundamental link between needs and fallibility, such as the human need for desire and the mistakes it causes us to make.
Othello also makes the audience acutely aware of its needs for emotional and moral certainty.
It will not allow them to judge its characters in terms of moral 'debit and credit', yet it still creates a need for the audience to seek a shelter from the full reality of its ending.
Even though the audience and the characters recognize that there's "no remedy", it doesn't overcome the need for one.
Whilst the dramatic illusion is bearable, there is still a need for some moral simplicity to lessen it, which is why some people might take Othello's final speech as a form of redemption for his terrible act.
The penultimate principle is that the protagonist invariably has exceptional qualities.
They are often good, kind and noble beyond normality, which makes their mistakes seem all the greater.
Hamlet claimed that even the best of people can fall from grace, even from just one fault.
Othello is extraordinary in his colour and achievements, but he has one vicious flaw, and that is his pride.
He boasts about himself and his background, with his high breeding and achievements.
When faced with Brabantio he says, " My services, which I have done the signog, shall out-tongue his complaints.
'Tis yet to know - which, when I know that boasting is an honour, I shall provalgate - I fetch my life and being from men of royal siege, and my demerits may speak unbonneted, to as proud a fortune as this that I have reached".
His pride carries him through to his tragic destiny.
At the point of his death he regains part of the nobility that he has lost.
He reasserts his use of language to reflect his character, talking as if he's describing his future chronicles which once again proves his exceptional qualities, "when you shall these unlucky deeds relate speak of me as I am: nothing extenuate, nor set down aught in malice".
The final point is the purging of emotion.
The audience is able to release its energies and emotions in a safe way.
It is supposed to make the audience know their place in the world, to become better citizens and reaffirm fear of the Gods.
Othello reminds us that prejudice and narrow-mindedness have awful consequences and may teach us to be better citizens.
However, in Leonard Tenenhouse's book 'Power on Display', he wrote that the miscegenation in the play was included in order to show that this sort of relationship is destined to have problems.
This makes it difficult to deicide whether Shakespeare followed Aristotle's point.
The way in which Shakespeare handles gender in Othello is interlinked with his handling of the conventions of tragedy.
Perhaps the most inetersting gender study in the play is of Desdemona.
Much of the action is focused on her.
The audience is frequently made to feel both fear and pity for her circumstances, she is an exceptional character and her traits, along with the perception of women at that time, are the factors that decide her fate and indeed the greatest tragedy of the play.
Desdemona is destined for trouble from the very beginning.
Almost all of the prominent playwrights of the Jacobean era included the torture of an aristocratic woman in tragedy.
This happens to them for two reasons.
Either they have become the desire of someone that isn't a part of the aristocratic community or they have become the subject of a clandestine love.
Desdemona suffers from both of these story lines.
Othello is led to believe that someone else is in love with her, and the miscegenation in their relationship and their unpermitted marriage appears as a mutiny against her society.
The prejudice is witnessed when Iago says to Brabantio, "an old black ram is tupping your white ewe".
There is a theory that Desdemona yearns for authority because her father influences her, she models herself on him in an attempt to acquire power on a level with Brabantio.
The command he holds over her makes her strive to gain an equal role.
She assaults the patriarchal Jacobean society by asserting authority over her life.
The audience is first presented with her sense of power at the beginning of the play when she addresses the senate advocating her marriage to Othello.
She is capable of speaking the language of law, and standing up to her father - "here's my husband; and so much duty as my mother showed to you, preferring you before her father, so much I challenge, that I may profess due to the Moor, my lord".
By marrying Othello she proves that she is strong enough to break her societal confines.
However, as with all the mutilated women in Jacobean tragedy, by asserting her sexuality she has become 'sexually monstrous'.
It is thought that by expressing desire, a woman takes on 'male parts' and is therefor monstrous.
However, her desire for authority is equally matched by her desire for Othello.
She is genuinely in love with him and this also contributes to her tragedy.
As J Adamson wrote, her view of Othello 'as unshakable is itself disastrously unshakeable'.
Desdemona said, "I saw Othello's visage in his mind and to his honours and his valiant parts did I my soul and fortunes consecrate".
Her loyal devotion to him blinds her to reality until it is far too late.
Her ignorance is fatal and her innocence incurs guilt.
She nervously refuses to acknowledge that anything could change in their perfect relationship.
When she tries to find out what is happening her efforts are so recessive that he takes them as an admission of guilt.
However her obvious love for Othello is futile in saving her.
Her actions in the first half of the play endorse Iago's vicious rumours.
By taking charge of her own destiny, Desdemona revealed to Othello that he was destined to lose control.
He may have been frightened by her aggressiveness as a woman, which could have led to his changing views of her.
Yet asserting control over her love life wasn't the only problem.
Iago is able to turn features of her political rebellion into to signs of unchaste desire, and so by the end, when she talks to Lodovica about Cassio's problems it proves to Othello that she is a "devil" and "the whore of Venice".
The ultimate power of society's outlook, topped with Othello's paranoid sexual jealousy, are the final factors leading to her murder.
As with so many independent women of literature, Desdemona had to die because there was no place for a woman of her character and principles in society.
Shakespeare certainly kept to the criteria of Jacobean drama when it came to the leading lady, and this ties in with his presentation of tragedy.
Aristotle influenced the form of Othello, and although there are some deviations, Shakespeare followed the main principles, creating a play full of the typical conventions of tragedy.
As a member of the infamous Bloomsbury group in the early twentieth century, E.M. Forster regarded the Victorian middle classes as leading an inauthentic life which prevented them from attaining social and personal fulfilment.
He felt that they were denied any true pleasure due to their repression and the prison that their desire for respectability created.
The epigraph to Howards End, 'Only connect', implies a need to unite and Forster explores this in his novels.
Each story is based upon a number of binaries which he attempts to connect in order to create a socially and personally fulfilling existence.
A search for truth, 'human wholeness' and 'cosmic unity' underlies the adventures of each of the main protagonists .
Forster's ideas on the subject develop throughout his early career, yet his essential message is that individuals need to change something within themselves and their perceptions of the world in order to 'connect' to something greater than the Victorian ideals and therefore have a greater chance of fulfilment.
This 'something' comes in a number of forms, such as a relationship, a truth or a spirituality.
He believes that this need is what makes us human, but he portrays the achievement as a struggle, constantly frustrated by nature and society.
This essay shall examine some of the themes of connection and fulfilment and explore how specific novels demonstrate them.
Virginia Woolfe wrote that Forster is always 'constrained to build the cage - society and all its intricacy and triviality - before he can free the prisoner' .
He uses a great deal of symbolism, and this 'cage' can be recognised in the convention-bound Sawston, but another good example is London in Howards End.
The Christmas shopping expedition demonstrates the way in which the busy, consumer-driven city inhibits people from connecting with themselves and each other.
The fast pace and progression of the city is created through growing industrialisation and capitalism, neither of which are spiritually valuable.
Margaret is disturbed by 'a darkening of the human spirit which fell back upon itself, to find a more grievous darkness within'  - the Christmas spirit is society's attempt at connection and its failure casts doubts on the validity of the inner life.
The craving for 'excitement and elaboration' demonstrates an underlying poverty of spirit .
The 'fog'  represents the oppressive nature of the city and the lack of a clear vision to help its citizens recognise the more important things in life, and whilst it divides the people it does not stop the trade.
The city sucks people down to its materialist level: 'satanic, the narrower streets oppressing like the galleries of a mine'  and the connecting roads only connect people to yet more materialism.
The fact that a symbol of the past, Mrs Wilcox, is so uncomfortable in such a place shows how far it is from anything 'good' in Forster's eyes.
Her spontaneous invitation to see 'Holy of Holies'  - Howards End, demonstrates her anxiousness to get back to her roots and connect to a place.
Her attempt to reach out and connect to someone through her offer of a visit is frustrated by Margaret's refusal, showing how she has become a part of the disconnected city.
It can be seen as a 'jail', denying its inhabitants from their better selves ; we see the previously calm Mrs Wilcox become distant and irritable, and as she ascends to her flat Margaret has a sense of 'imprisonment' .
The car is symbolic of the city - dirty, noisy and fast.
speeding people towards modernisation and making the world appear a blur.
Margaret experiences this on her journey to Howards End and struggles to connect with her surroundings once she arrives.
Just as the car reaches this place, the city is rapidly creeping towards it, threatening to impose its unfulfilling values.
Forster believes that 'society is invincible - to a certain degree.
But your life is your own and nothing can touch it' .
People have to detach themselves from society in order to take control of their own fulfilment.
If Forster is suggesting that the city and urban society prevent us from reaching fulfilment, he uses landscape as its counterpart - a source of truth, essential to connection.
As the Marabar Caves in A Passage to India magnify the contents of a person's soul, Wiltshire plays a revelationary role in The Longest Journey.
Mrs Fielding tells Ricky about his brother as they walk into the Cadbury Rings.
It is an ancient place and has a special life force as so many have lived and died there.
The rings are a circle of truth for Ricky in which he might connect with his brother.
Stephen stands by a tree at the centre, showing him to be synonymous with roots and the earth.
Upon his discovery Ricky attempts to run away from the circle and therefore the truth, but he is dragged down into the soil as he faints.
When he awakes he is re-born, and 'the earth he had dreaded'  seemed clearer and beautiful.
He calls out for Stephen, but the final connection is frustrated by the interruption from Agnes and Sawston convention, holding him back from a truly fulfilling existence.
Forster's symbolism embodies not just the landscape but the very geology that underlies it.
The truth Ricky seeks is rooted deep into chalky earth, not just in Wiltshire but in Cambridge too.
At university it is an intellectual rather than an emotional honesty but somehow the connection with the pure white chalk below empowers the soul and breaks through the conventions of society.
Although Ricky tries to accept the truth, Mrs Fielding is right in that convention gets the better of him, and just as the chalk broke the irreplaceable fine china, so the truth broke Ricky.
As the ancient landscapes featured in Forster's novels are a channel through which connections are made, so ancestry plays a similar role opening a pathway to fulfilment.
The brothers in The Longest Journey seem to have their fates pre-destined by their ancestry.
Ricky is born from a literally crippling relationship, meaning he is fated never to experience love and fulfilment, unlike Stephen, who was born from a passionate and loving affair.
Forster is denied the opportunity to have children by his own homosexuality and is pre-occupied by this theme, his characters searching for continuity in other places, often in terms of spirituality.
This is exemplified with Howards End, the longstanding family home of Mrs Wilcox.
It represents old England and the way in which it is suffering due to divisions is society.
Forster believes that the country needs to return to its roots in order to learn how to live together in a fulfilling way.
Mrs Wilcox wishes to leave the home to its spiritual heir, rather than to her materialistic family.
The Wilcox's, driven by capitalism, fail to see the point in valuing their roots as something special.
They move from place to place, their 'civilisation of luggage'  leaving them personally and socially unfulfilled.
They do not agree with the Mother's idea of society - 'can what they call civilization be right, if people mayn't die in the room where they were born?'
.
Margaret understands the importance of having 'some very dear place' to 'relieve life's daily grey, and to show that it is grey' .
Howards End is special because it has a past in the lives of people untouched by the ill effects of the modern world.
The old Wychelm signifies the importance of roots and the teeth implanted in it show that belief in nature and something spiritually greater than ones-self must underpin our value system.
In this house proper values are, Forster would have us believe, more readily established.
For example Margaret hardly recognises the empty servants quarters as they are 'just rooms again, where friends might shelter' .
Forster is preoccupied with the idea that an indulgence in the arts and over-valuation of personal relations can distract us from such fundamental truths, leading only to 'sloppiness' .
Certain characters have led unfulfilling lives through trying to fill voids within themselves with intellectual or romantic ideas.
It is noticeable in the Schlegel sisters' failed mission to make a lasting connection with Leonard, and in Phillip Herrington's narrow view of Italy.
It may have been a self-criticism of Forster himself, and this is proved correct by his alter-ego - Ricky in The Longest Journey.
The novel begins with a discussion over the existence of a cow if nobody is there to see it - this thought follows him throughout life as he comes in and out of touch with reality.
He has a tendency to romanticize and idealize the world to such a point that he fails to recognise important truths: 'I have a sense of beauty, which leads me astray if I am not careful' .
Ricky wants to believe that the cow is there, that there is more to life, even though it might not be something you can necessarily see, yet he doesn't always look for it in the right places.
This prevents him from living a truly fulfilling life.
His first mistake is to fall for Agnes, distancing her from reality by imagining her to be a 'dryad', even wishing she 'might not be a woman' .
His hesitation to join her in the dell - his place for truth and honesty, shows his reluctance to connect her with reality.
With no family or strong roots to connect to, Ricky clings to any possibility of love .
Their marriage prevents him from fulfilment as he becomes desperately unhappy in the convention-driven, unpoetic Sawston - the cow is not there and so therefore neither is reality: 'the shadow of unreality had begun to darken his world' .
His has a similar problem in idealizing Stephen.
By placing so much faith in one person Ricky is never truly satisfied.
It seems he has an inability to love, only idealise, which is equated with unfulfilment.
Whilst he has difficulty in recognising where reality lies, he does understand its importance in terms of connection.
By admitting the truth, or what is real and what is not, we allow the potential for fulfilment in our own lives.
An example of this is Ricky trying to make Agnes accept the reality of Gerald's death so that she can grieve and move on.
Forster is critical of this characteristic, yet we often find him romanticising within his narration as well - perhaps it is the curse of someone always searching for the ultimate connection.
He describes a sense of beauty as a 'desirable gift' , but it should not be over-indulged.
He certainly believes that it is of preference compared to people influenced only by society and convention.
CAROLINE Abbot describes these individuals as 'dead, dead, dead' , whilst for Agnes Pembroke 'the inner life had been withdrawn' .
A balance has to be found, which he attempts to create in Howards End, between the Schlegel's emphasis on intellectualism and personal relations, and the Wilcox's belief in capitalism and convention.
Margaret acts as a connecter in this novel, hoping that with Henry she could help him in the 'building of the rainbow bridge that should connect the prose in us with the passion.
Without it we are meaningless fragments, half monks, half beasts, unconnected arches that have never joined into a man' .
In order to make connections with Forster's perceived values, his characters have to realise that their present view of life is flawed and change themselves.
Thus it is necessary for Philip in Where Angels Fear to Tread to alter his perception of the world and himself in order to lead a more fulfilling life.
He had internalised the pointlessness of society life and thought he was 'fated to pass through the world without ever colliding with it' .
He believed that Italy epitomised his romantic ideal, yet the novel brings a series of revelations about himself and the world which significantly alter him and his perceptions.
Lilia's engagement shows him that he is as opinionated as the Sawston people he despises.
In order to achieve personal and social fulfilment he has to learn from experiences, of which there are many.
At the Monteriano theatre he identifies with the Italians' pleasure and with their spirit, realising the superficiality of his earlier conventional English idealisation of Italy merely as a beautiful place.
He sees at last 'something majestic in the bad taste of Italy' .
He regards the town's tower in a new light: 'the summit...was radiant in the sun, while its base was in shadow and pasted over with advertisements' , accepting that poetry does not necessarily disappear with ugliness; rather the world should be balanced by both poetry and prose .
His 'eternal moment' arrives after he has taken responsibility for his actions and his life and told Gino that his baby has died.
The strong physical pain that he experiences along with the sight of Caroline placating Gino causes him to make the final connection within himself and see beauty within the human spirit rather than the cultured arts - 'Philip looked away, as he sometimes looked away from the great pictures where visible forms suddenly become inadequate for the things they have shown us' .
His love for both Caroline and Gino is his connection with the world outside himself; he has become part of it rather than a spectator.
Through this process his search for personal and social fulfilment has progressed significantly, as he knows 'Romance only dies with life' .
Ricky has a similar experience in Where Angels Fear to Tread, when a physical and visual shock from Stephen in Sawston causes him to make the connection and see life as potential for fulfilment.
Characters unlike these two, such as Stephen and Gino have a greater ability in seeing opportunities for connection and fulfilment because they aren't constrained by conventional society.
They recognise the valuable things in life, such as connecting with the earh or loving one's child unconditionally.
Forster demonstrates what can happen to a person if their innate abilities are denied them through Leonard Bast in Howards End.
He represents a generation sadly disconnected from his more fulfilled ancestors.
He is infected by his internalisation of modern values, and upon seeing him Margaret wondered 'whether it paid to give up the glory of the animal for a tailcoat and a couple of ideas'  - by not connecting with his true self he is unable to achieve any kind of fulfilment.
Although Philip finds fulfilment through his relationship, there is a paucity of heterosexual relationships in Forster's novels, possibly as a result of his homosexuality.
Mary and Henry, Lilia and Gino, Ronny and Adela and others all fail to make truly meaningful connections.
This may be because they are often in opposing binaries, but, like Ricky, who wishes that there was a special place to record the importance of friendship, Forster also appears to value unconventional relationships, with connections where you wouldn't necessarily expect to find them.
One of the most unusual relationships is that of Aziz and Mrs Moore in A Passage to India.
As a homosexual writer, Forster would have been fearful of being labelled.
Rather than labelling helping us to connect with something, it seems to distance us from the essence of what it is, an idea explored in A Passage to India.
The bond between Mrs Moore and Aziz is so unusual that it is indefinable as a relationship - a notion that Forster seems to enjoy.
Despite their differences, they are able to see the beauty in each others souls and make a connection.
Their meeting significantly occurs in the idealistic 'Mosque' section, and so it is fitting that Aziz finds a friend there - a place that is an 'expression in architecture of a recognisable human aspiration' .
Their relationship seems idealized, yet it gives the most pleasure throughout the novel.
The friendship is frequently frustrated, yet it continues beyond death as their connection is of great value to Aziz even after Mrs Moore has died.
This suggests that whilst life is fragile, truly fulfilling connections gain a place in a spiritually higher sphere.
Unconvincing heterosexual associations coincide with weak sexual relationships.
It has been said that in Howards End it seems as though Helen became impregnated by Leonard's symbolic umbrella rather than through any physical connection .
It is equally unsatisfying in The Longest Journey, the most obvious physical attraction between Agnes and Gerald being thwarted by a prolonged engagement and sudden death.
Even odder is the situation between Agnes and Ricky.
Agnes is frequently disturbed by an 'abnormality'  in Ricky, and the one time that any physical connection between them is alluded to is contained within a lacuna, marked by the poetic 'A bird called out of the dell: 'Ricky!
'- A bird flew into the dell' .
Ricky is reluctant to meet Agnes in the dell, and this could be because it is a special place for him and his friends, and so by joining her there he betrays his relationship with them.
His attachment to her isn't as fulfilling as his relationship with his friends, and so he can only romanticize it.
Forster may have a point in disregarding the significance of sex, perhaps believing that it is too fleeting and a deeper spiritual connection is more fulfilling.
However, at the time of writing this novel he had yet to experience a sexual connection with anyone and so may not realise that it can be an immensely fulfilling experience.
The final theme that this essay shall examine isn't fully explored by Forster until his last novel, A Passage to India.
No doubt as a result of the devastating war, he seems to finally accept that human connections do not suffice for continuing human fulfilment.
As the sudden deaths of Gerald, Leonard etc show, life is too fragile to be relied upon.
Characters are constantly frustrated in their attempts to unite with each other, and so Forster searches for a connection with the universe as a whole in order to find fulfilment.
His universe is both a muddle and a mystery and unexplainable to humans through such small matters as religion.
Both Muslims and Christians believe in God as a presence, an opportunity for love and connection to exist within our lives, and so Godbole confuses them by saying that God 'neglects to come' .
However, he explains, 'absence implies presence, absence is not non-existence' .
India embodies this idea, as any attempt to label or define something causes it to cease to exist.
The harsh and confusing landscape leaves its visitors mystified, without anything real to connect too.
The Marabar Caves are a great dark space apparently void of anything, yet the absence does imply a presence, shown by its ability to reveal a characters deepest soul - for Adela the absence of love in her relationship becomes too great a presence, causing her breakdown.
Forster rectifies all previous attempts at connection by concluding that everything on earth is of equal value, and that we can only live harmoniously when this is recognised.
Godbole's unsuccessful attempt to make Mrs Moore, the wasp and a stone equal shows that it is an ability only capable of by God.
However, his attempt to do so shows the potential of the human spirit, and the novel ends with a hint of possibility for mankind in terms of fulfilment and connection, as Fielding and Aziz are only unable to become lasting friends 'yet' .
The story of every character symbolises Forster's search for fulfilment and connection, and as their lives are presented in such an intricate manner it is impossible to investigate every theme fully.
However, ideas such as convention, landscape, intellectualism and spirituality have been highlighted in this essay - all of which would have been the concern of a man disillusioned by a shallow and materialistic society, intolerant of his sexuality.
At the turn of the century it seems natural that he would look back upon our roots and an idealized society for guidance.
Whilst Forster sometimes seems pessimistic about the fate of the human spirit, he certainly recognises a potential for us to achieve connection and fulfilment once again - 'perhaps the last word would be hope?'
.
This extract from "An Encounter" in Dubliners may be characteristic of the modernist period.
The reader expects a light-hearted adventure story when reading the first paragraph, but what we get is something far more shocking and unexpected.
Can such a diverse period, therefore, be described in such limited terms?
Joyce is telling us not to be fooled by appearances.
The man we encounter is clearly a paedophile, allowing Joyce to touch upon a taboo subject.
We sense Joyce's desire to explore this matter but is restrained by what he can and cannot write.
Can it be said therefore, with any certainty, that the modernist writers of the period lost faith in narrative?
Many argued that the bleak realism which was depicted in both The Good Soldier and Dubliners, conveyed failure and confusion.
Sara Haslam states, that "the modernists who followed after World War I were noticeable for their pessimism and their sense of a failed, fragmented society."
However, rather than losing faith in narrative, the modernist writers, such as Joyce and Ford simply changed their approach to narrative.
Choosing to heighten a sense of mood in no way disregards narrative, but succeeds in expanding it.
Abstract content, fragmented style and confused narrative technique are all features of modernist writing.
In The Good Soldier, Ford offers us his story in a form of a montage.
The narrator, John Dowell is constantly throwing the story backwards and forwards through time, creating incoherence and uncertainty.
In Dubliners, Joyce presents us with a collection of short stories.
The frustrating shortness and lack of closure in the stories, with its grubby portrayal of everyday life has earned the book a modernist reputation.
These innovative techniques were a reaction against "traditional" Victorian forms of writing, which were generally seen as a source of escapism and moral awareness.
This created a shift in attitudes in the way art was viewed and conventional narrative structure was rejected.
Utilising art and allowing it to make changes in society and politics became a new system of thought.
With these views came the formulation of certain aesthetic principles, usually associated with the Imagistes.
By adopting an "art for art's sake" attitude, many modernist texts offer realistic fragments of atmosphere.
Joyce does indeed capture a sense of mood here, but rather than disregarding narrative, he is using art and aesthetics as a medium to develop the story.
In the quote, Eveline seems to be alone, possibly isolated.
We sense her melancholy.
The use of the term "invade" gives us a sense of violation.
The man she watches "clacks" and "crunches" on the pavement, suggesting aggressiveness.
Eveline is a young woman and one could come to the conclusion that this story is perhaps about a young girl's sexual awakening.
The use of the colour red may signify sex or passion.
Perhaps the aggressive undertones suggest rape?
Joyce, therefore is utilising art as a means to create uncertainty and stir the reader's thoughts which in turn increases the sophistication of the narrative.
Ford and Joyce shared an interest in the survival of the aesthetics.
Like many Imagist poetry, literary impressionism features in The Good Soldier.
However, while the Imagistes were interested in capturing a moment and had no interest in narrative, Ford uses narrative to mediate between his style and technique.
Traditional forms of writing tend to give a fictionalised view of life which therefore, does not depict reality.
But changing attitudes to this type of writing meant writers adopted more innovative techniques to develop and expand their work.
Ford uses artistic impressionism in his novel.
Dowell offers us a vivid image of Leonora.
The image is classical, almost statuesque.
Dowell presents us with his negative opinion; followed by a contradictory "I don't know."
This creates confusion as Dowell seems uncertain about what he thinks of the image he has presented to us.
The instability here increases depth and variety to Ford's narrative.
Joyce's deliberate use of stream of consciousness in Dubliners, allows him to build on the quality and sophistication of the narrative.
In "The Dead," Lily, the caretaker's daughter is described as being "literally run off her feet."
The obvious mistake here is that one cannot be literally run off their feet.
This is Lily's mistake however, not Joyce's.
His use of Free Indirect style allows him to partly access her thoughts, but he is also distanced enough to be ironic.
Joyce's use of artistic flair offers the reader an authentic literary reading.
Traditional novels offered an omniscient narrator; one that the reader could rely and depend upon to give us a truthful account of the story.
Ford presents us with an unreliable narrator.
We are constantly questioning the truth of what Dowell tells us.
Although his unstable narration means that he loses control of the narrative, this does not mean that narrative does not feature dominantly in the novel.
By constantly flipping backwards and forwards in time, we get a sense of incoherence and uncertainty that allows us to glimpse the world in which Dowell is living.
Hood states that ".
.
.
the narrative development has depended upon the tension between the flux of past and present moments."
History and past influences are important in determining the quality of modern writing.
Talking about Ford, Haslam states that, "he will write from his memory, from his search for his past, from his attempt to come to understand the gaps between his past and present self."
Can this be applied to not only Ford, but Dowell?
Dowell is constantly affected by past events, which is why he switches between past and present tense.
This features at the beginning of the story, instantly creating uncertainty in the reader.
Is this intended?
Haslam believes that this is Ford depicting a realistic account of the uncertainties in life.
.
.
Indeed, Ford was writing at a time of unrest, during war and in a world of internal conflict.
Perhaps he was trying to convey that life and the world is unstable and impressionistic.
However, many would argue that this is in fact Dowell trying to confuse and perplex his readers.
Why does he do this?
He tells us of his desire to write, to get things off his chest.
Could Dowell be a reflective character of Ford?
In this sense, the story is Ford's as opposed to Dowell's, even though Dowell is the narrator.
For did he not begin the story with, "his is the saddest story I have ever heard," instead of "this is the saddest story I have ever told."?
This uncertainty about who the true narrator here puzzles the reader.
Although this narrative technique would have been seen as radical for the period, we question whether art and language can ever be wholly new or different.
It is as the Imagist poet T.E.
Hulme theorised, there is "no geist without ghost."
Nothing is ever really new.
The modernist writer, Virginia Woolf states, Everything in life and society is affected by history and past events and this is depicted in modern literature.
Therefore, is The Good Soldier as innovative as we might like to think?
Although the structure and conventions of the narrative is certainly different to the conventional novel, it is far more stable than that of Imagist poetry.
The Good Soldier does in fact bear a resemblance to the detective story.
There is mystery, intrigue and we are constantly questioning the information we are given.
It is essentially a quest for the truth.
The novel enforces sensationalism, as it deals with adultery and sex.
This reinforcement of some stability would surely appeal to those in search for narrative structure.
Are the modernist writers, in their feat to experiment with style and technique, challenging a different type of "interesting" story?
If Eveline was indeed pursuing a sexual relationship, then Joyce is including sexual politics into his work and is pushing the boundaries of what is acceptable content for a novel of the period.
Terence Brown, in his introduction to Dubliners describes the book as a collection of "plotless stories."
True, the narrative ellipses does create confusion and the reader is often left wondering, "What is the point?"
But the technique merely allows the reader to form their own opinions and conclusions.
Hodgart may be underestimating Joyce's work here.
Joyce dominates his stories with the recurring theme of paralysis, trying to depict a realistic Dublin as he felt that society was restricted in terms of freedom of thought and expression.
As we have seen in "An Encounter," paralysis is depicted as sexual obsession that cannot be escaped from.
Father Flynn suffers from physical paralysis in "The Sisters."
Joyce's main aim was to convey realism in his stories by his use of naturalism and his determinacy to get details absolutely correct.
When his stories were seen as shocking, he stated that, "it is not my fault that the odour of ashpits and old weeds and offal hangs around my stories."
Again, this echoes the desire to makes changes in society.
Rather than Dubliners being an uninteresting collection of stories, perhaps people were simply not ready for Joyce's naturalistic portrayal of the mundanities of everyday life.
Joyce's portrayal of reality proved to be deeply shocking during the period.
F.S.L.
Lyon's review of Dubliners describes the depiction of the city as "drab, impoverished and servile."
By refusing to convey Dublin in a fictional manner, the novel was deemed subversive, which would in fact enhance the interest of the stories.
In his quest to convey realism, Joyce portrays a corrupt priest in "The Sisters."
Father Flynn is a well respected priest who, upon his death receives the formal ceremonies of which a man of his religious standing is accustomed too.
However, we are drawn to the unusual relationship between Father Flynn and the unnamed boy, who is both attracted and repulsed by him.
Joyce is perhaps undermining society for being blinded by false appearances.
Joyce is depicting realism and irony with his mix of religion and hypocrisy.
In "Counterparts," Joyce expresses the expectations of society.
Farrington, a copy clerk is unhappy in his job and situation and merely desires freedom and pleasure.
As a result, Farrington finds himself in the midst of financial crisis.
Upon coming home, he beats his son in frustration.
Joyce is heavily satirizing religion as his son constantly repeats, "I'll say a hail Mary for you."
Joyce is inviting us to question, will religion really help?
Paralysis prevents any real closure to the stories.
Often, this lack of closure is seen as suggestive of the lack of events or action.
In her essay on Dubliners, Marilyn French states that, ".
.
.
some of the stories are oversimplified .
.
.
Joyce's own values were not developed enough."
On the contrary, it can be viewed that the lack of closure in fact builds up tension and frustration.
Was Joyce deliberately withholding his ideology to allow us to form our own conclusions, or was this a result of publishing restrictions?
His stories were sent back several times for revision and editing.
Due to these restrictions about content, Joyce may not have necessarily "preferred" to create mood and atmosphere, but was simply limited to doing so to avoid publication refusal.
Ford was also limited to what he could explore in his novel.
One review which featured in the Boston Transcript, blasted the novel's sensational content.
To avoid such reviews, Ford may have settled for a technique which would not have created such outrage.
Again, this does not indicate that he "preferred" to limit his work to the creation of mood.
In fact, when his work was described as enforcing literary impressionism, he declared, "I don't know; I just write books and if someone attaches the label of impressionism to me, I do not much mind."
There is much speculation about the characters in the text being "complex" at all.
If the stories in Dubliners are indeed too short and casual, how could the characters be developed enough to be complex?
For example, upon first impressions, the character of Eveline is assumed to be complicated.
She yearns for freedom from oppression.
She is confined to her sexuality and female role.
We think we have accessed her thoughts when she refuses to board the train.
"Her eyes gave him no sign of love or farewell or recognition."
However, upon closer inspection, we question whether Eveline is as complex as we would like to imagine.
Eveline offers the impression of a meek girl, limiting her education to popular songs and stories, such as The Bohemian Girl, which is a light, romantic opera.
She is also fairly naïve.
It is possible that Frank was to take advantage of the young girl and have no intention of marrying her.
A simple, naïve girl in love is a popular stereotype, so we question how complicated she is.
One could look to the character of Harriet Smith in Emma.
Not only is she young and naïve, but she is also limited to her knowledge about the world.
Eveline therefore is made up of common cliché's.
Although Dowell succeeds in perplexing his readers, we are left questioning the quality of his character.
We are frustrated with his determinacy to believe that Captain Ashburnham is a "good" soldier.
"For I can't conceal from myself the fact that I loved Edward Ashburnham."
We are frustrated with Dowell's imperceptiveness.
Is he just stupid?
Can he really not distinguish between Edward's outward conduct and false morality?
His story is also predominantly solipsistic which makes us wonder if this is because he has nothing else to offer us, but talk of himself.
However, when faced with such characters as Leonora, one would feel compelled to argue that she is in fact a complex character.
She is dominant, perceptive and conceals her true feelings.
Ford may be expressing the paranoia of the New Woman, who was slowly rising due to the effects of war.
These women were becoming more independent and dominant in society.
There are parallels here with Mrs Mooney in "The Boarding House."
Mrs Mooney is a career woman.
She separates from her husband and gives him "neither money nor food .
.
.
And took what remained of her money .
.
.
And set up a boarding house."
She prides herself on dealing with moral matters as one would a "cleaver deals with meat."
Gabriel in "The Dead," is also an interesting, complicated character.
He is an intelligent, cultured man.
However, he suffers from a sense of failure.
When he learns that his wife Gretta was in love with Michael Furey, he slumps into a feeling of self pity.
Could this be a reflection on Joyce?
Does Joyce project the image of himself onto Gabriel?
The failure that Gabriel feels could be self-reflective of the failure Joyce may feel with his work.
The complexity of the characters in Dubliners and The Good Soldier add to the quality and interest in the stories, rather than divert away from the narrative.
As Haslam states, "the realism and consistency are the sole virtues of the story."
If this is the case and realism does in fact make modernist texts successful, then surely this makes the narrative interesting.
As we have seen, portraying reality was a major theme in modernist writing.
As Joyce and Ford have depicted, reality is only evident when using aesthetic principles to create mood and effect.
Clearly, however, this in no way disregards narrative.
Walker believes Poe; 'affirmed in his best tales and poems that literature must dramatize man's permanent moral and psychological fears."
Much of his work incorporates these issues of intellectual and cultural concern, but determining the extent to which the text reflects its historical context depends heavily on the reader's interpretation, as societal comment is seldom overt or explicit.
Poe favours setting his work in eerie, distant locations outside of reality such as those in 'The City in the Sea' where; 'Death has reared himself a throne/ In a strange city lying alone."
As Poe's writing rarely provides a direct representation of conventional American life, the reader must explore the abstruse and concealed implications that lurk beneath his words, which can make establishing how the text reflects American society difficult.
Exclamatory discourse and accumulated caesuras disjoint linear narrative progression in 'The Tell-Tale Heart,' allowing Poe to realistically depict terror; 'Was it possible they heard not?
Almighty God!
- no, no!"
Continual tense shifts engender temporal ambiguity, which, coupled with repetition and rhetorical questions conveys tangible hysteria and panic.
Credibly enabling the reader to share this disturbing anxiety could be an attempt to reflect the undercurrent of unease felt by many Americans.
Despite stereotypical images of a buoyant land fuelled by optimism, many felt troubled over the country's future direction.
Angst arose in part from concern regarding mass urbanisation and people remained sceptical about exponent expansion whilst remaining a unified nation.
Having the narrator; 'cut off the head and the arms and the legs' of the corpse may be a figurative allusion to the problematic unfeasibility of national division.
Dismemberment has horrifying consequences here as the corpse refuses to die intensifying the atmospheric sense of unrest that pervades the tale, which may be indicative of national agitation.
The tale's principal premise, concealment and outward appearance, centres on the ubiquitous presence of a hidden corpse beneath the floorboards.
It becomes a metaphor for the trepidation and malevolence lurking below a seemingly normal surface, encapsulated by the guilty dread that de-stabilises the narrator's confident façade.
Whilst outwardly polite and respectful to his victim; 'calling him by name in a hearty tone, and inquiring how he had passed the night,' the narrator remains consumed by revulsion and loathing.
This could be read as an implication that the idealised notion of American citizens as open, progressive and liberal was in fact deceptive.
The Mexican War and slavery demonstrated that freedom and equality was far from available for all, prompting much questioning regarding the type of people and nation being built.
Alliterative consonance coupled with fricative sibilance in statements such as; 'this I thought and this I think,' generates a sinister hissing sound that effectively mirrors the consistent reverberation of remorse through the narrator's mind.
The overwhelming paranoia that drives the protagonist to madness, may be indicative of the guilt of a nation haunted by its wrongs and fortifies the legitimacy of Walker's previously cited statement.
But, Poe's Southern origin implies a probable tendency towards the acceptance of slavery, making such deductions questionable.
Exploratory attempts to define the nature of the American character such as those by Emerson and Whitman, dominated the literary cannon.
Poe's repeated use of mirroring and doubling suggests that an absolute definition is unattainable.
'Ligeia''s central thematic preoccupation with interchangeable personalities could be read as representational of Poe's possible belief in a fractured and confused American identity.
Throughout the tale we remain uncertain of both Ligeia's existence and identity; she metamorphoses into Rowena and is even suggested be one with the narrator; 'did my spirit fully and freely burn with more than all the fires of her own."
Enumerable manifestations of one person may reflect the overlapping, paradoxical versions of the American character that existed and consequential complexity of defining the self if it exists in multiple form.
America was yet to forge an authoritative sense of history and society from which to establish a secure model of American identity, something partly attributable for its undeniably ruptured cultural character.
The text may therefore be raising questions regarding how formative one's sense of country and national identity is.
Interpreting 'Ligeia' as an allegory for unstable identity supports Wald's belief that; 'The reader is drawn into.. a world of uncertainty that may be either supernatural or psychological.
And that uncertainty extends to the boundaries of the self.'
Many Americans were torn between the ideal and reality of the self, suspended between two worlds and identities; one brave and new, the other regressive.
Abundant dichotomised binaries may be representational of this as Poe's work is littered with numerous divisions, ranging from light and dark to sanity and lunacy.
In 'The Fall of the House of Usher,' oscillation between antithetical parallels provides much of the tale's energy.
Roderick too is plagued by insecurity as the narrator states; 'In the manner of my friend I was at once struck with an incoherence- an inconsistency...an excessive nervous agitation."
As with 'The Tell Tale Heart', palpable instability and distorted reality leaves the reader struggling to ascertain what is true, a constructive confusion that aids our understanding of the disturbed psyche, the predominant focus of Poe's work.
Again he manipulates multiple identities merging Roderick's mind with the house as they simultaneously disintegrate and subside.
The 'mighty walls rushing asunder', therefore mirrors his mental collapse.
Effectual personification of the house's; 'vacant eye-like windows,' enables it to become a metaphoric projection of Roderick's skull, allowing the reader to enter both his home and insanity.
Ostensibly, Poe's predominant concern seems to be psychosis; he appears far more concerned with exploring the internal workings of mind rather than analysing society and culture.
But, tales focused on characters so caught in their own minds and pain may be a comment on the dangers of American individualism.
If so, Usher is perhaps used to highlight the danger of exclusion from human community when life becomes dominated by a materialist mentality, possibly symbolised through his home.
Trapped by the weight of his house and traditions, Usher is doomed to an existence of loneliness and alienation; Poe's linguistic dexterity here enables him to create a tangible sense of oppressive confinement and stagnation that supports Bloom's belief that; 'Death in life, Poe's recurrent image of existence without soul, epitomises the prison house of materiality.'
'Minute fungi overspread the whole exterior,' of the decaying House of Usher and may be emblematical of the potential rot in American literature without advancement into new forms.
The narrator in 'Ligeia' is consumed by a 'longing for the departed' that results in his deleterious 'inexpressible madness,' which could be read as a warning against placing excessive emphasis on the past.
Macabre and disturbing grisly visual images of life in death may reflect an assumed belief that American writers had failed to create anything original yet; 'the whole body took on..the livid hue, the intense rigidity, .the loathsome peculiarities of..the tenant of the tomb. '
Allusions to festering and putrefaction may therefore be an insistence on the need for active experimentation with new modes of writing and literary progression.
The absence of original genres in American literature left some writers feeling a sense of responsibility to pioneer new forms and ideas.
In 'The Philosophy of Composition' Poe insists on; 'keeping originality always in view', which may allow us to view his amalgamation of differing modes of writing as a post-colonial attempt to create a unique form specifically designed to enable the articulation of authentic American experience.
Although innovative and atypical in content, much of his verse is traditional in form and metre, exemplified in poems such as 'The Sleeper' and 'The Valley of the Unrest.'
These textual examples support Galloway's comment that; 'Poe's own poetry is often seen as poor evidence of the success of his theories of composition,' as predominantly eight syllables per line and predictable rhyming couplets make the extent to which he succeeds in making old forms new questionable.
Life in death can also be interpreted as a social comment on the peripheral position of women.
Images of suppressed and entombed women may demonstrate how denying women political power and authoritative social standing made them like the living dead.
Confined and incarcerated in the House of Usher, Lady Madeline is diagnosed with; 'a gradual wasting away of the person'; without a purpose and place outside of the home it could be argued that these women did not essentially exist.
This may be why they are often portrayed as unreal and illusory; Lenore for example is depicted as a shadow, described as; 'Darkness there and nothing more."
By imbuing women with sprits strong enough to overcome the death of the body, Poe may be urging them to fight against repressive imprisonment within the domestic sphere; 'I pray to God that she may lie/ Forever with unopened eye.'
Such deductions are problematic as they contradict the previous anti-individualistic nuances in Poe's work by implying that he was possibly in favour of freedom and individualism.
The absence of direct reference to social and historical context makes it difficult to ascertain with accuracy and confidence the degree to which Poe's work reflects it.
This ambivalence and contradiction leads the reader to continually question and challenge their interpretations as his work may be no more than an exploration of madness, base entertainment designed to thrill and excite.
It is possible that Poe had no intention of commenting on the issues examined here, but as the very essence of his style is characterised by uncertainty and ambiguity, we can never be sure.
I therefore agree with Voss that;
Ibsen's Hedda Gabler and Lorca's Yerma display two female protagonists who are seen to exercise masculine behaviour throughout their tragedies.
Hedda's inactivity and dependence on marriage for financial support is typical of a woman in late 19 th century, Norwegian society.
However, as a woman, Hedda is expected to find her raison d'être in being a wife and a mother, but these designs do not at all content her.
By rejecting the traditional practices of her gender, she becomes more masculine, which is displayed in her treatment of George Tesman and the power she attains over Eilert Løvborg.
Unlike Hedda, Yerma desperately longs to use her ability to reproduce and, in conjunction with society, thinks it's degrading and wasteful to remain barren.
As much as she yearns for motherhood, her husband is not at all compelled to have children, discarding Yerma's basic freedoms as a woman.
In some ways, Yerma will never have the responsibilities of a man, the strength, or dominance in Spanish society.
However, by neglecting the unique, reproductive capabilities of her womanhood, she is no longer defined by her gender and her lifestyle becomes closer to that of a man.
Camilla Collett was one of the first writers to highlight the feminist problem in Norway.
She vented her frustrations with the inert existence of the middle-class woman in her diary: There is little doubt that Hedda is similarly dissatisfied with her inactive, married life.
She constantly complains of boredom as her presence at home is merely decorative, while her husband is heavily involved in his scholarly interests.
B.J.
Hovde observes the unjustness that 'Love and marriage was a woman's career', yet they were not free to marry for love .
Along with women of her time, Hedda did not exercise many freedoms in choosing a suitable husband.
In conversation with Brack, she confesses that she married Tesman because he was determined he would be able to support her, none of her admirers made a similar offer and, above all, her 'time was up'.
Hedda's decision was accelerated by her increasing age as she depended on her beauty to attract men and, with little else to support her, she was required to consider the financial stability of her partner.
These factors led Hedda to an ill-matched marriage with a man who, regardless of love and affection, she treats with an air of indifference.
Unfulfilled by her husband and with no talent for motherhood, Hedda is compelled to create her own amusement to relieve herself from boredom.
She considers that Tesman could inject some excitement into her life if she could persuade him into an occupation that interests her, such as politics, as she is not at liberty to pursue this career herself.
In the opening scene of this play, she offends Miss Tesman by identifying her new hat as that belonging to the maid and later confesses to Brack that she consciously upset her for her own entertainment.
While this mischievous behaviour is not exceptionally harmful, her objective to control the life of another can hardly be described in the same terms.
Ibsen is keen to excuse her conduct as a consequence of her gender in patriarchal society.
He argues that 'women have no influence on external matters of government.
Therefore they want to have an influence on souls'.
Ibsen successfully highlights this as a desire among women by extending similar behaviour to Mrs Elvsted.
The introduction of her character encourages the audience to compare her with Hedda, as they are both married women of a similar age.
It is certain that Elvsted is proud to have influenced Løvborg in the way Ibsen describes, but to influence a person is quite different from a desire to govern lives.
Elvsted explains how she directed Løvborg away from his drinking habits: While Hedda actively seeks control of Løvborg with the intention to destroy him, Elvsted's power is not something she sought, planned or understands.
Hedda scornfully perceives that she 'saved' Løvborg, but her positive influence is completely undone by Hedda, who consciously moves him to destruction.
Although Ibsen delegates a similar aspiration to these women, it is considerably more dangerous in the hands of the malicious, treacherous protagonist who applies greater pressure to Løvborg and achieves extreme results.
In comparing these women, it becomes clear that Elvsted does not experience inertia like Hedda in this play.
She escapes her unhappy marriage because she cannot bear to simply be a convenience to an old man who 'cares for no one but himself' .
Despite the criticisms of society and monetary concerns, she pursues a better life with Løvborg, who respects her and, through education, has elevated her to a level of equality with him.
She seeks her 'comrade in arms' because she enjoys his company and he provides her with a focus by allowing her to assist him in writing his revolutionary works.
J. Chesley Taylor observes that 'Hedda is a character who is torn between two selves: the romantic self, which desires to be liberated from all social restrictions, and the conformist self, which wants society's approval and thus dares not violate its taboos'.
This causes Elvsted and Hedda to react opposingly to identical situations.
Hedda is similarly unhappy in her married life with Tesman but, while she admires Elvsted for taking a brave leap, she would never repeat her actions because she lacks courage to challenge society's conventions.
She used to enjoy Løvborg's company, like Elvsted, but she left him out of cowardice when their friendship began to develop.
Therefore, while Ibsen realises that the contained lives of women can lead them to a useless, mundane existence, he displays hope in Elvsted who is an active figure because, unlike Hedda, she does not fear scandal for the sake of her happiness and a motivational object in life.
In a letter to Moritz Prozor in 1891, Ibsen explains the androgynous nature of his leading role: Ibsen certainly succeeds in his intentions as it soon becomes clear that, although Hedda agreed to marry Tesman, she in no way belongs to him.
Throughout the play, both Brack and Løvborg reject Hedda as Tesman's wife by addressing her by her maiden name.
Theoharis C. Theoharis believes that 'Tesman makes a quantum leap in choosing his spouse', suggesting that society will challenge the idea of them as a couple and Hedda's class and elegance will always elevate her above her husband.
The imbalance in their relationship means that Tesman will forever be indebted to her.
He struggles financially to provide everything she wants in the house because he would not want to disappoint his wife and never asserts any masculine authority over her in fear that she would rebel.
She constantly pushes the boundaries of his tolerance by behaving rudely to his family and refusing to spend time with him.
However, most things escape his notice because his naivety cannot contend with her advanced skills in manipulation and deceit.
An example of this can be seen in the fourth act of this play when Hedda pretends that she burnt Løvborg's manuscipts in concern for his interests.
While he should see through her lies, he is too delighted and overwhelmed with his wife's pretended display of affection to question her honesty.
Hedda's use of pistols displays a predatory aggression which can associate her with the 'femme fatale'.
She is seen threatening only men with weapons, which Brian Parker interprets as an enjoyment in reducing men 'to their biological level'.
She delights in the authority that her pistols attach to her, but provokes entirely different reactions from her victims, Tesman and Brack.
While Brack controls her actions with calm, authoritative imperatives such as, 'Don't point that thing at me' and 'Don't play the fool' , Tesman cannot trust her not to operate the pistols.
He panics, expresses sheer terror and begs her to put them away, highlighting her manly control over him.
By showing both reactions, Ibsen implies that Hedda's relationship with Tesman allows her to become more masculine because, as perceived by Theoharis, his 'gender is neuter' .
In Hedda's company, he becomes effeminised by submitting to her will and establishing no control over her.
Meanwhile, she is at liberty to exercise the authority that is traditionally employed by the man within patriarchal society, where Ibsen locates his play.
Although Løvborg is less pitiable, Hedda also succeeds in directing his actions.
Theoharis explains why the audience should be particularly impressed by Hedda's triumph over Løvborg: Hedda is a sophisticated Machiavellian, whose intelligence outwits that of two learned scholars.
Her demonic capabilities are thoroughly compelling and exemplify a woman's capacity for ingenuity.
At the end of this play, Hedda's situation is reversed as her life is placed in the lecherous hands of Brack.
However, Brack stumbles upon this knowledge and promises that it will be contained, unlike Hedda's skilled, pre-meditated attack on Løvborg.
Hedda cannot bear to be controlled by another, although many women of her time were disciplined by men.
She ends the action of the play by returning the control to her fatal hands and, in doing so, she restores her masculine independence.
Yerma's tragedy is set in Rural Spain where women's lives were similarly governed by patriarchy and society's code of honour.
Through the dialogue of women, the audience becomes aware of the harsh restrictions placed upon them by men, such as arranged marriages.
In the opening scene, Yerma describes how some girls 'trembled and cried before they got into bed with their husbands', suggesting that unwilling, ill-prepared girls were coerced into marriage at too young an age.
In his essay entitled, "Honor, Blood, and Poetry in Yerma", Gustavo Correa outlines the Spanish woman's physical boundaries as 'the walls of her house' and her occupation as simply 'matrimony'.
This is echoed by a young woman who complains of her arranged marriage and the expectations attached to this role: The young woman resents the forced coupling of men and women and doesn't understand the necessity of such a system.
She is keen to express the unfairness of a society which locates women in the suffocating parameters of the house, while the men are allowed the freedom of the field.
Lorca firmly establishes Yerma in the home by confining her to this space for the full length of the opening scene, while her husband and friends come and go.
More than a physical restriction, her stationary position can be viewed as a symbol for her immobility in life, which is rapidly becoming stale without the development of children.
Unlike Hedda, Yerma is keen to embrace the woman's life of matrimony and motherhood.
However, matrimony alone is not enough for her, as she cannot be certain she loves the man her father chose.
She admits that, 'from the first day' she was engaged to Juan, she began 'to think about having children'  which, she believes, is not too much to expect from him.
Not dissimilar to Hedda, Yerma requires an object to which she can devote her time and attention.
While she doesn't reject the household occupations attached to her gender, there is a frustrating void in her routine that craves a child: The cleaner the house, the more Yerma is reminded that this is her only responsibility and focus for her care and attention.
She argues that her house is dying from a tense atmosphere between husband and wife and an emptiness which craves some lively, new energy.
Throughout the play, the audience is encouraged to feel greater sympathy with Yerma as the protagonist's anticipation and preparedness for a child is emphasised.
She has a naturally feminine, maternal quality, as evident when she voices concern for Juan's health and nags him to improve his diet.
She offers first-time mother, Maria, advice on pregnancy but is unable to provide information from first hand experience as she has not had the opportunity to practice her theories.
Yerma longs for a child, despite her full awareness that it can be a demanding and exhausting struggle: This was argued in response to a woman's complaints of motherhood, highlighting Yerma as fully-prepared and eager to experience a suffering that provokes moans from other women.
By presenting the audience with the desperation of a barren woman and a host of examples of others who complain of their maternity, Lorca encourages great pity for Yerma, as she appears more deserving and willing than those blessed with children.
Yerma is located within a society where accordance with nature was celebrated and those who neglect the natural designs of their gender were vulnerable to ridicule and torment.
Correa outlines the theme of maternity as essentially Spanish because 'the structure of Spanish society, with all the powerful force of tradition, has imposed upon its women a duty, a mission; before all else she is to be a mother' .
To a modern audience, it would not be unreasonable to assume that the weight of society's pressure on Yerma would lead her to another man who can provide her with what belongs to her.
This play opens with an illustration of Yerma's dream where a shepherd leads a child by the hand.
As the only characterised shepherd of this play, Lorca suggests Victor could be the subject of Yerma's desires and does not abandon this idea as the play progresses.
Although they are only ever seen innocently speaking to each other, their relationship triggers suspicions throughout the village, which could be enough to ruin her reputation.
Juan is concerned for his family's honour, prompting him to regularly remind his wife that stepping outside of her home and simply speaking to others is a dangerous occupation for a woman.
In particular, Yerma's barren state increases her vulnerability to gossip because she is expected to create a scandal by seeking another man.
The washerwomen cruelly place Yerma in a category of unfortunate women who 'put on face powder and rouge' and 'wear a sprig of oleander in pursuit of a man who is not their husband!'
.
These expectations cause Yerma to be watched under a particularly strict eye in anticipation of a scandal.
However, the women are not aware of the importance Yerma places on preserving her honour, as emphasised by Correa: The protagonist displays her admirable morality by refusing the pagan old woman's offer of her son to provide her with a child.
Yerma is greatly offended that the woman should presume she could be led to such a development by her desperation.
As this option is closed to her, she is completely dependent on her stubborn and unfeeling husband, establishing her firmly in the submissive position of the woman.
In an argument with Juan, Yerma exclaims 'How I wish I were a woman!'
which commences the new fluidity of her gender.
Without a child, she no longer shares the unique quality that unites and defines women and she is therefore no longer restricted to the occupations of her gender, to submission to Juan or dependence on him.
Lorca engages Maria and Yerma twice in this play, with a gap of three years between the two meetings.
In their first conversation they are perceived as very intimate friends, sharing secrets and advice with each other.
However, it is clear that Yerma has become estranged from Maria in their latter engagement as her child has created a distance between them.
Yerma has replaced her hope with bitterness after a painful five years of emptiness and cannot help but feel deprived when she sees her friend with a baby.
Yerma no longer feels she belongs to the female sex, allowing her to extend her behaviour into masculine territory.
As Yerma's frustration progresses, her attitude to Juan undergoes great transformation.
Yerma evolves from a submissive, disciplinable woman into an argumentative and opinionated power as she begins to prioritise her own interests.
At the beginning of the play, she is seen sombrely agreeing to Juan's request to stay indoors but her days of yielding come to an end when she begins to dominate in arguments with Juan by confusing him with sophisticated metaphors and firmly expressing her criticisms.
Yerma explains the reasons behind her transformation in the third act: With little else to lose, Yerma refuses to resign herself to a barren life without a fight.
She sees her rebellious words as a beautiful defence of the son she will never bear.
Her powerful words become action in the final scene where she violently triumphs over her husband in terminating his life.
Yerma's new freedoms allow her to spend her time in a different way: In performing a man's task, Yerma further detaches herself from her sex by crossing the boundaries that divide women from men.
Yerma seeks a new independence in departing from her gender.
'If only I could have them all by myself'  suggests her desire to separate herself from men and displays her resentment for their necessary involvement in pregnancy.
Yerma never wants the life of a man, yet she is placed nearer to this gender by her husband in disallowing her children.
She resents her ability to exercise new freedoms in this role because she never requested independence, power or to extend her occupations outside of the home.
However, Hedda resents her inactivity and dependence on men that is attached with being a woman.
She rejects motherhood and matrimony in favour of mastering skills that aid her control over men.
While Hedda aspires to acquire the authority of a man, Yerma wants to use her abilities as a woman, yet neither of these figures are presented as traditionally belonging to a single gender, making them tragic, androgynous figures.
In his book, Kes, published in 1968, the author Barry Hines tells us about the story of a young boy named Billy Casper.
At a stage of the story, Billy is asked at school to write a 'tall story'.
This passage is very instructive about Billy's life, even if it is very short, it's full of information about his life and generally speaking, about life in England in the 60's.
We will now, in the first paragraph, explain why this story is important to the themes of the novel and what it tells us about Billy's life.
Then, in an other paragraph, we will see how his life would have been affected by Thatcherism.
At school, Billy's teacher, Mr Farthing asks the pupils to write a 'tall story'.
He describes it as a 'piece of fiction, an imaginary story'.
Billy 'dipped his nib right up to the metal holder, then balancing on the front legs of his chair, book and head askew, began his story'.
He then writes a day, in which everything is perfect for him.
We can consider that Billy's story can fall into 4 themes: the food, his house, his family and school.
Even if the story was supposed to be fictionional, Billy's story is far from being really imaginary.
We will now see why.
The first main topic Billy deals with in his 'tall story' is food.
He imagines that his mother brings him breakfast in bed, with bacon, egg, bread, butter and a big pot of tea.
For his tea he eats chips and beans and he can eat ice cream in the cinema.
Finally he eats fish and chips for supper.
What can appear to us as casual meals turn out to be incredible for Billy.
That theme allows us to understand Billy's lack of food, and also explains why Billy is so underweight.
This is highlighted later in the book when Billy prefers to buy some fish and chips instead of betting on horses for his brother.
The second main topic in his story is his house.
He writes that he lives in a big house up on the edge of the moors, with carpets on the stairs and in the hall, and also with central heating.
What we can see that here is a description of the house Billy delivers newspaper to at the beginning of the story .
The house is at the top of the moors, far from any other.
He also sees that 'the hall and stairs were carpeted.
A radiator with a glass shelf ran along one wall  there was a big fire in the room'.
Billy's real house is cold, as it's described on page 11, 'it was gloomy and cold without the help of the fire'.
Moreover, his real house is probably one of those done-up miners' cottages, tiny and cramped between two others.
This leads to problems such as lacks of privacy for instance.
The third main topic we can find in his story is everything that is related to his family.
Thanks to his story, we can understand that his father left home when he was young and that he misses him  my dad came in carrying his case that he took away with him.
I haven't seen him for a long time but he was just the same as when he went away.
I was glad he came back ' ).
On the other hand, we understand the problems he can have with his brother.
Given his father has left home, his father spends his time bullying him.
So, in his 'tall story' his brother Jud has gone to the army and he'll never come back.
This arises other problems such as his lack of parental bearings, and roughly speaking his lacks of love at home.
The last topic present in his story is school.
We find many allusions such as 'when I went to school all the teachers were good to me and they said "hello Billy, how are you doing?"
and they all patted me on the head and smiled and did interesting things all day'.
This extract helps us to understand that Billy doesn't like school  my mother said I was not going to school any more').
At school he is bored, and everybody, pupils and teachers are picking on me.
These themes are important to understand English social problems in the sixties.
It especially focuses on the problem of North England, like in Barnsley , where the story takes place.
We also see, thanks to this story that Billy didn't enjoy his life.
We could also say that this story highlights the wealth gap, as it is depicted in the book, between the house 'up the moors' and the workers' housing estate.
But, even if the situation can look bleak at that time, how would it have been 20 years later, under Thatcher?
We will thus start with a presentation of Thatcher and the so called Thatcherism.
Then, we will describe her program and her reforms that could have an importance in Billy's life.
Margaret Thatcher came to power in 1979, and was re-elected twice, in 1983 and 1987.
As a member of the conservative party, her opinions are characterised by the will to abandon the welfare state and the Keynesianism  and to promote privatisations.
She was also nicknamed the 'iron lady', given her strong will especially against unions.
This action starts since 1980, when on the second of January, the Iron and Steel Trade Confederation called its members out on strike for a pay dispute.
Wanting to prove her determination to break the power of the unions after the victory of the miners in the strike of 1972, she asks her Employment Secretary, Jim Prior, to make picketing illegal.
Nonetheless, Prior resisted her demands and the steel workers won  The idea of pumping money into the economy to reduce unemployment was anathema').
But Thatcher didn't give up and in 1982, Prior's successor, Norman Tebbit, clearly more aggressive than Prior, passed the Employment Act, that made Unions 'liable for damage in the case of unlawful industrial action'.
This was not the end of her fight against unions.
On the 25 th January 1984, Howe, her Foreign Secretary at that time, announced a ban on Trade Unions, justifying it on grounds of national security.
One of her major reforms was the closure of mining pits.
She had first intended it in 1981, but due to low stocks of coal to stand a strike, it was postponed.
Nevertheless, the idea came back in 1983, when the 'Monopolies and Mergers Commission' reported that over 75% of coalmines were making a loss.
20 pits were announced to close, and the reaction started on the 1 st of March 1984 in Cortonwood.
Nevertheless, even after over one year of strikes all over UK, Thatcher never dropped it and finally all pits but 15 closed.
Her reforms also included lots of privatisations.
According to her, given that the national companies were supported by the state, there was little chance of bankruptcy and thus, no motivation for competition.
And of course, the government benefited from the sales of those companies.
She also declared that, thanks to those privatisations, 'the state's power reduced and the power of the people enhanced' .
At the end of her 12 years at the head of the government, over two thirds of the industrial assets owned by the state had been sold.
This includes the NHS, or utilities such as water or electricity.
She also reformed education, through the 1988 Education Reform Act: University Grants Commission was replaced by a University Funding Council to remove the prohibitive cost of expanding the numbers of students in higher education After having outlined her policy, we will now consider how Billy's life would have been affected by it.
Barnsley and Yorkshire generally speaking, relied a lot on industry and more specifically mining industry.
As the figure from Miners on Strike, Andrew J. Richards, 1996, show, there used to be 56,000 miners in Yorkshire in 1984.
All of them had been sacked or their jobs were not replaced from 1984 to 1994.
It is more than probable than Billy would have gone down the pit, even if he didn't want to, there were really few possibilities for boys at that time .
And considering the poverty of his family, and the 1988 Education Reform Act , Billy would not have had the means to go to high school.
It is then logical to think that Billy would have lost his job and would have gone to the dole.
But, at the same time, Thatcherism didn't help unemployed, and didn't finance any program to revive the old industrial sectors.
He would have then have many difficulties to find an other job .
He probably would have moved away to find a job.
The social life of Barnsley would also have been really affected.
First, because of the huge cuts in social funds, as part of a reduction of public costs and also because the miners knew each other, they were friends and loved to meet each other after work.
No more mine, no more mining associations.
After the failure of the strikes of 1984-85, the importance of the unions had decreased.
Unions that used to be a bond between miners suffered a lot from the loss of the struggle against Thatcher's government and many of the workers themselves tore away.
As we have seen, even if it is quite difficult to imagine the life of Billy under Thatcher, we can easily predict that the consequences of her program would have been fatal for him, but also for the biggest part of the inhabitants of Yorkshire generally speaking.
To conclude, Kes is a description of the Yorkshire mining industry of a pinpoint accuracy: not only the accuracy in the descriptions of the places and landscapes, but also the accuracy of the atmosphere that reigned in the 60's in Northern England.
Thanks to his 'tall story', the reader can understand through the eyes of a child the hard reality of the time.
That whole part of England, which relied a lot on the mining industry, was hit terribly by Thatcherism and it is sure that Billy's life would not have improved at that time.
Even though since 1991, Yorkshire has experienced a form of economic recovery, it is still behind other parts of England on a wealth scale.
For this essay I have chosen to examine the representation of women in modernist texts.
There is conflict over the idea of how much a part women played in the modernist movemement.
Some people have considered women to be marginalised in modernism, claiming that they had little influence over literature of the time, and pointing out that very few modernist female writers are remembered compared to the many male authors.
They argue that male writing excluded the thoughts of women and continued with the phallogentrism that was typical of the nineteenth century.
However, this idea has been countered with the argument that women were actually the cause of modernism.
The early twentieth century witnessed great legal, educational and economic changes for females, along with a higher visibility of women in public life, especially in the cities.
This was considered to be the cause of a new icon - the 'new woman'.
This was a self-defined woman, who was autonomous and so no longer reliant on the support of men.
Previous to this, women had mostly been excluded from literary culture.
Their attempt to express themselves appropriated a modernist innovation, providing the voice that modernism had been looking for.
The disagreement over their influence is reflected in modernist writings, especially in the way in which they are represented.
I shall examine this through a selection of texts.
Henrick Ibsen reflects many of the changes that were occurring in the world of women in his play 'Ghosts'.
The leading character, Mrs Alving, typically occupies the private sphere in her secluded home in a small town in Norway.
She is desperate to live up to Victorian ideals by keeping her son and husband happy, and presenting the image of a perfect, stable family life to the public.
These elements of the character show the influence of nineteenth century ideas on the role of women.
Within the play there are references to doors and windows and heavy mists pressing against the house.
This represents the pressures of public morality and expectations influencing and restricting Mrs Alving.
However, this is contradicted as she takes on the role of the 'new woman'.
She demonstrates strength and independence as she takes control of the events that have previously shaped her son's life, as well as her own.
By revealing the truth she takes on an innovative and unfeminine role, contradicting the idea of women as meek and fearful.
This character also introduces other modernist ideas about women.
It represents women as the central figure in the home, as opposed to the husband.
It develops the idea of women as sexual beings within themselves through the relationship between Mrs Alving and the pastor, as she attempts to justify their feelings for each other, resolutely claiming that to keep them a secret was a "crime against us both".
There is also mention of new, possibly modernist writings that she enjoys reading.
These contain revolutionary ideas about society and spirituality, and it is interesting to see a woman taking these in and advocating them.
Joseph Conrad presents subtle yet important ideas about the role of women in his novel 'Heart of darkness'.
At first glance, Conrad appears to consider the role of women as unimportant, as they are barely mentioned in the story.
However, a closer, perhaps feminist reading of the text may consider that it shows women to symbolise and indeed, maintain civilisation.
As they are not present in the jungle to regulate behaviour, the rampant masculinity leads to inevitable chaos.
The obvious difference between the two key women in the play represents the duality of womanhood at the time.
Kurz's black mistress could represent the heart of the jungle, a primal, passionate figure that is an intrinsic part of nature.
She is described as "savage and superb, wild-eyed and magnificent; there was something ominous and stately in her deliberate progress".
This woman is referred to as 'she', which could be a refernce to 'she - the one who must be obeyed', creating an idea that women are all-important.
Her opposite, Kurz's wife, is white and spiritualised, intent on maintaining the 'ideal' of her husband even after death, "who was not his friend who had heard him speak once?".
She portrays the old Victorian image of femininity and a deep spirituality, "the sound of her low voice seemed to have the accompaniment of all other sounds, full of mystery, desolation and sorrow", whilst the mistress shows a new aspect.
The female characters are not given names which gives the impression of them being strictly in the background and unimportant to the men, but it is interesting to note that it is a woman who puts the whole story in motion as Marlow's aunt is the person to recommend him for the trip.
This story could be interpreted as representing the conflicting thoughts about women at the time, as their importance in society begins to be considered and acknowledged.
D.H. Lawrence felt that it was important for the novel to always be tackling new propositions and evoking fresh feelings.
He was intrigued by the human subconscious and the primal instincts of possession and killing.
He also had specific views on sexuality and women, on how they should dress and conduct themselves.
His novella, 'The Fox' explores the thinking of two females, as he wishes to understand the workings of their minds.
He presents the idea of two women living alone together as unusual.
They intend to run a poultry farm together but it is altogether unsuccessful and he implies that this is because a man is not there to help them.
This could possibly be a criticism of lesbianism as he insinuates that that type of relationship has no possibility of working out.
His female characters do not appear to have a great deal of strength, despite their determination.
Banford is physically weak and her jealousy and manipulative tendencies only work against her and make her seem like a stereotypically petty female.
Although March is described as being "the man about the place" and "more robust", she still cannot kill the fox and easily falls prey to Henry's charms.
The way in which she cannot control herself emotionally when it comes to desire and the need to be with a man portrays women as emotionally weak and dependant on men.
D.H Lawrence is insistent that a woman looks at her most femine when she is in a dress, even though a shirt tucked into trousers would show off the female form most effectively.
By making March change costume he implies that she has succumbed to the requirements of man.
The women in the novella stick to the typical orientations, as they are mostly associated with being indoors in the domestic area, whilst Henry spends most of his time outside.
D.H. Lawrence recognised the liberation of women and felt that it had been fully achieved.
He also felt that it was beginning to be taken too far and claimed that they would soon hold tyranny over men.
Perhaps by writing the 'The Fox' he is trying to show that the ultimate primary relationship should be between a man and a woman, and that any other type of relationship is unnatural and impossible to maintain.
These three texts demonstrate the ways in which women were beginning to be understood during the modernist period.
Whether or not they were the sole voice of modernism is debatable, but they prove that there was a new awareness of women and the roles that they play which influenced female representation in writing.
In this essay I will be looking at how the formal properties of Joseph Conrad's Heart of Darkness  and Ford Madox Ford's  The Good Soldier  give order and articulation to the experience of modern life.
The word 'form' implies a structuring of some kind, and, when applied to literature, the formal properties of a work 'usually refer to its structural design and patterning, or sometimes to its style and manner in a wider sense, as distinct from its content.'
So what are the structural designs of both Ford and Conrad's works?
A first-time reader of Heart of Darkness skimming through the work would note that the short narrative consists of three chapters of similar length.
The piece is too short to be a novel, and so can be termed a 'novella', described as 'a fictional tale in prose, intermediate in length and complexity between a short story and a novel, and usually concentrating on a single event or chain of events, with a surprising turning point.'
The structural design of The Good Soldier embodies that of a novel, '...an extended fictional prose narrative'.
Greater in length than the novella, the novel 'permits fuller, subtler development of characters and themes'.
Differing from the prose romance '...a greater degree of realism is expected of it...it tends to describe a recognisable secular social world, often in a sceptical and prosaic manner inappropriate to the marvels of romance.'
So both Heart of Darkness and The Good Soldier utilise traditional realist structural designs  and outwardly suggest an agreement with realism, 'a mode of writing that gives the impression of recording or "reflecting" faithfully on actual way of life'.
Both texts, however, are far from being conventionally realistic.
They are instead innovative, adapting these structural designs to give a stable body to an otherwise complex narrative.
How then do Ford and Conrad subvert the structural designs they choose to utilise?
Heart of Darkness contains traits of Victorian realism, at the same time, In this way the novella bridges the gap between Victorian and Modern novelistic styles.
HOD can be seen as belonging to the genre of imperialist Victorian travel narrative.
Written for Blackwood's Magazine, Conrad was writing for an audience that was 'conservative and imperialist in politics, and predominantly male'.
Conrad lulls this audience by stirring up feelings of imperial pride at the beginning of HOD.
Conrad does this by making reference to the actions of imperialist pioneers such as Sir Francis Drake, evoking 'the great spirit of the past' , only to present a story that questions the morality of imperialism.
As Robert Hampson suggests, 'the narrative strategies of both Conrad and Marlow work to subvert many of the assumptions accepted by their audience'.
Conrad uses the enigmatic narrator, Marlow, to carry forward his subversive narrative.
Unlike traditional Victorian narrators such as the technically distant, removed narrator in George Eliot's Middlemarch  who reports the social commentary of the novel in the omniscient third person point of view, '... Marlow is such an unreliable narrator and only too ready to interpret facts in the light of his own prejudices."
Conrad breaks the stereotype of the omniscient narrator that spoon feeds the reader information that is taken for granted as 'truth', Marlow's narration instead '...is essentially reflective' making HOD '...a narrative which works by means of suggestion rather than statement...concerned with asking questions rather than providing answers.'
As previously stated, Conrad is generally agreed between critics as a modernist writer.
Richard Adams' description of modernist writing is useful, suggesting that, Other than T.S.
Eliot's The Waste Land , James Joyce's Ulysses  is the other 'major landmark' of modernist writing and is a great example of the stream-of-consciousness narrative method.
Conrad does not utilise stream-of-consciousness in Heart of Darkness but he utilises a similar narrative technique in the use of 'interior monologue' described as 'the written representation of a character's inner thoughts, impressions, and memories as if directly "overheard"..." Richard Adams notes that 'Heart of Darkness contains some notable examples of the operation of this method, moments where the articulation of Marlow's private thoughts threatens the chronology and the coherence of his narrative'.
An example of interior monologue in Heart of Darkness is when Marlow reflects on the dark journey he has ventured on, This passage is contemplative, its style is reflective and shows the psychological process of Marlow revisiting previous experiences.
Sigmund Freud came up with his theory of psychoanalysis just after Heart of Darkness made its first appearance , but the novella still contains some interesting connections especially in some of Marlow's dream-like descriptions, Heart of Darkness reflects the mood of its era, with upcoming theories such as those of Freud and Darwin, what was once familiar quickly became complex and unfamiliar.
Written at the end of the nineteenth century, the daunting fear of entering a new century is reflected in the novella's dark story.
David Bradshaw discusses the turmoil of the era in which The Good Soldier was written, an era '...of serious political, industrial, social and cultural unrest in Britain - the suffragettes, for example, had been in full cry - and the novel's predominantly wistful mood reflects Dowell's nostalgia for the era of early-Edwardian high style...'.
Richard A.
Hood describes The Good Soldier as '...a novel which shares something of the literary world of Conrad and Crane and Henry James, but which points, as well, to the "tapageur and riotous" new forms of Modernism just emerging'.
Like Conrad's Marlow, Ford utilises an unreliable narrator, Dowell, in The Good Soldier, who is described as '... English Literature's most fascinating enigma'.
Samuel Hynes discusses the critical debate surrounding Dowell saying, 'The patent inadequacies of Dowell as a narrator have led critics of the novel to dismiss his version of the events, and to look elsewhere for authority'.
The Good Soldier consists of a reflective account by Dowell told in first-person narrative retrospectively, but unlike Heart of Darkness The effect of this is that Dowell '...tells his story as a puzzled man thinks - not in chronological order, but compulsively, going over the ground in circles, returning to crucial points...what he is looking for is the meaning of his experience'.
Richard A.
Hood in his critical essay discusses the narrative techniques of Heart of Darkness and  The Good Soldier and how they differ from each other.
Hood suggests that 'Marlow's narrative is removed from any real experiential present .
Nothing in the immediate process of telling impinges upon the story itself.
The focus is traditionally reflective.'
Dowell on the other hand in The Good Soldier Both The Good Soldier and Heart of Darkness are 'frame-narratives' that contain tales within a tale, what makes Ford's work even more difficult for the reader to decipher is that The Good Soldier is not a story, instead it is an act of narration consisting of Dowell's reflections and modified reflections of other character's reflections.
It is no wonder that Mark Schorer in his critical essay compared the novel to '...a hall of mirrors...a bewildering maze, of past circumstances and future consequence that - somewhat falsely - it contains.'
It is clear from the first sentence in Dowell's account that it is not even his own story that he is telling.
'This is the saddest story I have ever heard'  is how Dowell begins his tale.
Far from being an omniscient narrator, Dowell admits that what follows are reflections on someone else's story.
As a first-person narrative, Ford makes it '...possible to eliminate authority altogether, and to devise a narrative which raises uncertainty about the nature of truth and reality to the level of a structural discipline'.
Therefore, all the reader has to go by in order to comprehend the narrative is whatever Dowell says, he can therefore choose to omit certain facts and the reader would be none the wiser.
Samuel Hynes explains this point well, saying Can the reader gain the truth by trying to decipher and piece together Dowell's fragmented narration?
Perhaps Ford is highlighting the futility in gaining 'truth' from a character's narration, especially when Dowell is presenting his version based on other characters' versions.
Moser suggests that 'Dowell's chief purpose in telling the tale is not to understand it but to get it out of his head'.
Hynes argues that the novel highlights the difficulties with such untrustworthy narration saying, '"How can we know what is true?"
is itself what the novel is about.'
Peter Brooks similarly says that Heart of Darkness By raising these questions, and coming up with these innovative narrative techniques, Conrad and Ford have created a more realistic narrative vehicle with which to portray the process of thought and reflection.
By rejecting omniscient third-person narrators in favour of intrusive first-person narrators, both writers have produced literary works that more realistically demonstrate the act of narration compared with literary realist equivalents.
Critics have suggested that the complex, digressive narrative style of The Good Soldier acts as a shock-absorbing tactic.
Miriam Bailin, in her critical essay suggests that '... Dowell's indirect transmission of his story, his more general framing of all experience and emotion, and his continual digressions serve to displace, distance and ultimately disarm the force of the story.'
Discussing the anti-linear narrative plot she says that the '...diffusion of plot may be life-like, but...it also provides a means of conveying disturbing or unresolved material in a shock-proof manner.'
And discussing Dowell's struggle to narrate properly she offers the point, 'often Dowell's attempts to clarify the chronological sequence of his story provide... diversions from startling and painful events.'
An example of Dowell diffusing the plot can be found at the end of the novel where he suddenly exclaims that he has forgotten to mention how Edward died, saying 'It suddenly occurs to me that I have forgotten to say how Edward met his death' .
Instead of building up the plot to a climactic description of how Edward gruesomely committed suicide, Dowell casually mentions Edward's death, making the event seem insignificant due to the fact that it had almost not been drawn attention to.
At the beginning of part one, chapter two, Dowell struggles to find a suitable way to narrate his story saying, He decides to imagine himself '...for a fortnight or so at one side of the fireplace of a country cottage, with a sympathetic soul opposite me' .
Miriam Bailin suggests that The metaphorical cottage gives Dowell a safe, comfortable setting where he can express and articulate his version of the painful story he has heard.
The anti-chronological narrative plot in Heart of Darkness has also been described as a shock-absorbing tactic that allows Marlow to articulate an otherwise anarchic tale.
Albert J. Guerard suggests that Conrad uses literary impressionism in Heart of Darkness as an innovative technique to try and capture the essence of the moment during Marlow's reflective process.
Conrad was a believer in the impressionist style, discussing the task of the artist he argues that Conrad goes on to say that 'my task which I am trying to achieve is, by the power of the written word to make you hear, to make you feel - it is, before all, to make you see'.
An example of literary impressionism in Heart of Darkness is Marlow's description of the tribal attack of the steamboat.
Describing the boat being hit by arrows he says Marlow's reflective description here is a great example of how the Impressionist style captures the raw moment.
The passage really involves the senses; visually - 'little sticks, flying about'; acoustically - 'whizzing'; physically - 'striking behind me'.
Marlow's bewilderment in the chaos is expressed well too, he only visualises 'little sticks' at first, and only after reflection realises the significance of the sticks - that they are arrows and that he is being shot at.
Ian Watt clarifies this point well saying, This passage is also a good example of 'Progression d'effet', another literary style utilised and described by Conrad as a work that '...carries its justification in every line'.
Whether The Good Soldier is an impressionistic text is contentious, Thomas Moser believes it is saying that '... Dowell recalls Marlow in his propensity to talk about how difficult it is to fulfil their common purpose to make the reader see and about how hard the impressionistic method really is.'
Hood on the other hand suggests that the novel has '...moved beyond literary impression, as the fundamental reality'.
Literary impressionism can however still be identified in the novel, Dowell's description of the countryside is a good example, Miriam Bailin identifies literary impressionism in this passage saying, 'With its minute attention to perspective, to diversity of colour and to shades of light, the picture he paints is very like an Impressionist canvas'.
In Marlow and Dowell we have two narrators that pose '...in an exemplary way central questions about the shape and epistemology of narrative'.
As Peter Brooks suggests, the reader 'needs to read Heart of Darkness as an act of narration even more than as narrative or as story', the same can be applied to The Good Soldier as well.
The elusive nature of Ford described by Rebecca West as a "scholar gipsy" can be seen in the character of Dowell, '...recognised only as he disappears round the corner'.
Both Heart of Darkness and  The Good Soldier are far from being 'easy reads', their plots are better compared to as a 'hall of mirrors'.
Both authors adopt traditionally realist narrative structures but subvert their traditional function.
Ford and Conrad question the uncertainty of truth, the attainment of knowledge, and the futility of narration itself in their complex, non-linear plots.
Instead they utilise innovative techniques to more realistically demonstrate the reflective thought process and the act of narration.
Dowell's digression and inability to narrate properly act as displacement tactics that blunt the force of the painful events he describes.
The dark tales that trouble Dowell and Marlow in Heart of Darkness and  The Good Soldier are made stable by being put into formal narrative structures.
The Good Soldier adopts a Vorticist outlook described by Robert Greene as '...anarchy, fission and incest within a rigid formal structure'.
Since much of the content in Heart of Darkness and  The Good Soldier reflects similar events in the biographies of Conrad and Ford, perhaps both authors found they needed a stable formal narrative structure in order to express the turmoil they had experienced.
Miriam Bailin thinks this so in the case of Ford, saying In his critical work Ulysses, Order, and Myth T.S.
Eliot compliments Joyce's adaptation of the novel , describing how it offered '...a way of controlling, of ordering, of giving shape and a significance to the immense panorama of futility and anarchy which is contemporary history.'
Heart of Darkness and  The Good Soldier, like Ulysses, are great examples of how the adaptation of realist narrative forms allow the authors to give order and articulation to the experience of modern life.
Henrik Ibsen wrote the play 'Ghosts' in the middle of the Victorian era in 1881.
He was at the forefront of the modernist movement, directing a revolution in writing.
For this reason, Ghosts contains many of the main elements of modernism, which can be identified in this extract.
The play was designed to shock the audience/reader and make them reconsider society's rules and values.
Indeed, the extract begins with Pastor Manders praising the "illusion" that Mrs Alving has created of an ideal, respectable family.
This immediately provides us with the modernist idea that the appearance of the perfect Victorian life might not be everything it seems.
Ibsen believed in asking questions to break down boundaries, and this is what Mrs Alving does by suggesting that she should tell the truth about the family's secret, no matter how dire it sounds.
She goes on to shock Manders by alluding to the idea of condoning an incestuous relationship, and claims that it certainly wouldn't be "unheard-of".
As well as questioning the sanctity of marriage, she defends free love and proposes that a woman has the right to leave her husband.
She even questions God, by pointing out that, according to religion, we all descended from incestuous-like relationships.
Her criticisms of religion are enhanced by the revelation that she and Manders almost entered into a clandestine affair.
Mrs Alving has the idea that we are all haunted by 'ghosts' lodged in our minds, which determine the way we feel and the decisions we make.
These ghosts come in many forms - not just our parents, but old theories, events in history and society's moral codes.
She is afraid that they restrict her from doing what is right and that they have or could damage the people she cares about.
All of these ideas reflect the modernist way of thinking.
Society was entering into a period of ontological insecurity, questioning who and where we are.
The authority of science was growing and people had problems in deciding what to believe.
Karl Marx's Communist manifesto had created a sense of unease with the idea that nothing is stead-fast and certain.
They suggested that religion 'drugged' people, and blinded them from the truth.
Mrs Alving certainly felt this way, as she claims that Manders' apparent victory over himself when he resisted going against God and acting out his true feelings for her wasn't a good thing, and only worked to hurt them.
She said it was a "crime against us both".
The fact that she dismisses much of what the pastor says reflects the gradual dismissal of religion in society at the time.
Mrs Alving just wants people to be happy, but at the same time believes that things shouldn't be hidden in secrets.
Her suggestion of incest reflects the modernist revelation that feelings aren't always as straight-forward as the Victorians would like them to be, and the pastor's predicament shows that no one can escape from this, no matter how 'holy' they are.
Like Mrs Alving, the modernists thought a lot about the way history determines our lives, especially our parents.
In Ghosts, Captain Alving is a hidden character from the past, yet he dictates almost everything that happens to his family in the future.
They felt we needed to break free from our ancestor's boundaries, as well as society's.
For them, the focus was on the individual, and there was the feeling that we should create our own moral codes and beliefs.
It seems that Oswald may not have just inherited the mistakes of his father, but hereditary syphilis too.
To allude to sexually transmitted diseases would have been very shocking at that time.
Not only would it have had a profound effect on the audience, but it contributes to the theme of things going rotten in the play, destroying the family and contradicting values.
There was a great deal of rebellion and anger felt in the modernist period, and we get a sense of this in the extract.
Mrs Alving is angry with herself for being afraid of the 'ghosts', and with the fact that she is forced into sacrificing her feelings gor the sake of "duty" and "obligations".
The extract briefly implies that some change in thought has begun, as Manders refers to some books that Mrs Alving has been reading which he has previously described as "disgusting, free-thinking pamphlets".
He thinks that these have generated her modern insights into society, and spoilt her respectability.
Mrs Alving does admit that they help her to think more confidently, but claims that it is her own experiences that have made her look at life differently.
Mrs Alving is a modern character in that she is a strong, determined woman who isn't afraid to stand up for what she believes in.
She is willing to sacrifice her respectability and place in society for the sake of the truth.
It is likely that she is meant to represent the beginnings of modernism.
You can tell that it is just emerging, as she is still held back by Victorian concepts.
She is trying to live up to the Victorian values that she has grown up with, so in many ways she remains constrained in her thinking.
She claims that she is a coward because she is scared of the 'ghosts' that surround her, and wishes that she could break free from them.
If Mrs Alving represents modernism, then Pastor Manders is the voice of Victorian values.
He tries to uphold his faith and is loyal to tradition.
He attempts to distance himself from Mrs Alving's radical ideas by claiming "I simply don't understand you", but with persuasion he does admit that family life isn't always "as pure as it ought to be".
This possibly reflects the faltering in religious belief.
The fact that in this instance it is a woman, who's educating a man, shows another modernist shift in society, with a reversal in gender roles.
Many of these elements are followed through in the use of language.
The way in which they address each other with their titles demonstrates the remaining Victorian formality in their relationship.
It is a furtive conversation, showing that the subject matter is sensitive and shocking.
Manders uses the language of a pastor to enforce his role, identified in; "do there we see the fruits of your reading.
And a nice harvest it is".
When he stutters he shows the shock that the people of Victorian society would have felt.
Mrs Alving often sounds quite wry and cynical, typically modern.
For example, when Manders talks of his "victory" over his feelings, she likens it more to a "pitiful defeat".
The fact that Manders sees the situation in this light just goes to show how deeply lodged the 'ghosts' are in his mind.
These details fulfil Ibsen's desire to employ language that is natural to the characters, with obvious distinctions between them.
He wanted to create a play that makes the audience feel as though they are eavesdropping on something from real life.
As well as these techniques, Ibsen gives Mrs Alving the use of metaphors, such as "ghosts" and describes the "fabric" of Manders' beliefs as simply being "tacked" together.
By doing this, Ibsen perhaps puts her on a higher plain to the other characters, showing that she has a special message to deliver.
Metaphors also contribute to the modernist ideas of ambiguity and double-meaning, as Freud casts doubt in people's minds by claiming that the "possibility always remains that the dream may yet have another meaning".
These double-meanings are important to Ibsen as he says that life is full of symbolism, so he therefore wants his plays to be full of it.
The main symbol in Ghosts is the ghosts themselves.
As Mrs Alving says, they represent the influence of family and old ideas.
The dark and misty place in which the play is set portrays a hiding place for these ghosts, so that they can linger on in the characters, "abysmally afraid of the light".
The stage description is important to the play, as the doors and windows are influential, creating varying senses of entrapment.
The heavy mists pressing against the house symbolise the pressures of society closing in.
Despite the strict insistence on the stage settings, there are few stage directions, especially in this extract.
This suggests that the words of the play are more important than the actions.
This could well be true as Ibsen may not have wanted to distract the audience from the message he was trying to put across.
After the popularity of his play 'Doll's House', Ghosts was greatly anticipated by the public, so he may well have seen it as an opportunity to shake up Victorian society.
He had little faith in the resources of the theatre, so it is likely that Ghosts was written as much for the reader as the audience.
Skills of drama are employed in Ghosts, especially in the way intrigue and suspense is built up.
This is noticeable in this extract as the tale begins to fully unfold, as Mrs Alving makes her speech and the relationship between them is finally revealed.
Manders especially, jumps around the subjects, alluding to his feelings as "the hardest struggle of my life".
There is often a moment of realisation in modern texts, and Ghosts is no exception.
In this case, it is Mrs Alving's explanation of her fear that supplies the epiphany, and it provides the main theme to the story - the idea that we are all haunted by 'ghosts'.
Another feature of modern texts is the refusal to keep to the linear.
This extract refers to moments from the past, present and future, contributing to the mixed up feelings of the characters and adding to the uneasiness in the play.
This is also highlighted in the large number of questions asked in this extract, as it shows how uncomfortable they are with the new ideas and revelations.
It is difficult to ascertain the genre of Ghosts.
I think that if anything, it is a tragedy, as it does contain a character that experiences a downfall due to a fault in their nature.
However, this is not exclusive to just one person.
They all experience downfalls in one way or another, and this isn't just due to personal faults, but those inherited from the ghosts that Mrs Alving speaks of.
Perhaps modernist tragedy is meant to be more passive and ambiguous, highlighting the fact that everything isn't always straight forward and that things can happen to people through no obvious fault of their own.
Reading this extract is very useful in the search to identify themes of modernism, as it contains so many of its typical elements.
We see criticisms of religion, family, history, ancestors, and even society as a whole.
Despite the fact that we can still recognise some of the fundamentals of Victorian writing, this play would have been revolutionary at the time, and it marks the starting point for a whole new phase in literature.
On April the 25 th 1860 an anonymous author submitted the following review of George Eliot's The Mill on the Floss  to The Guardian: Dickens perceptive remarks, outlined in a letter to Elizabeth Gaskell, appeared to be correct.
Victorian society still looked to the novel chiefly as a source of entertainment and amusement until 1890.
They did not wish to be reminded of the fears and deep-rooted instability that pervaded their society, which was fractured by social, political and scientific upheavals.
The proliferation of scientific material, notably Charles Darwin's The Origin of the Species , which prompted religious doubt, the periodic economic depression inflicted by the Corn Laws passed in 1815 and the passing of the Reform Act in 1832, allowing the industrial middle class to vote, brought elements of the tragedy into everyday life.
Why then did these influential writers, George Eliot and Charles Dickens, adopt the facets of tragedy to structure their novels?
In response to this, I will examine how the themes of gender relations, education and use of landscape are used as vehicles to write tragedy in George Eliot's The Mill on the Floss  and Charles Dickens's Great Expectations , focusing specifically on the final sequences of each novel.
After the examination of George Eliot's Felix Holt  an anonymous writer for the Westminster Review concluded that "George Eliot's novels are not novels in the ordinary sense of the term - they are really dramas."
Therefore, it is rather fitting that one of Eliot's earliest pen names was "Pollian, the Angel of Destruction."
In Mill on the Floss Eliot inflicts two major tragedies; the first is the loss of the Tulliver fortune and the second is Maggie's inability to realise her intellectual ambitions.
Tulliver's losing the mill to Wakem not only highlights the struggle of the artisan classes against the invading capitalism from the cities, but for Raymond Williams it shows " the change from prosperity to adversity" integral to tragedy.
However, when the principles of Goethe's bildungsroman  are addressed, it is Maggie's journey of personal growth that exhibits all the elements of Aristotelian tragedy.
Matthew Arnold in The Scholar-Gipsy  concisely highlights Maggie's dilemma; " this strange disease of modern life, with its sick hurry, its divided aims."
Maggie is 'divided' between a loyalty to her family and her 'thirst for all knowledge."
Eliot structures the novel on what Raymond Williams defines as the tragic "wheel of fortune," in which the protagonist makes their infamous tragic error, hamartia, before trying to reverse the consequences, peripeteia, concluding in a moment of recognition, anagnorisis, accompanied throughout by sequences in the novel that evoke pity and fear.
Eliot recognised that the language of her Arcadian protagonist lacked the "eloquent special pleading characteristic of the traditional tragic hero," so she used female subordination to evoke pity.
Mr Tulliver' sister, Mrs Moss, is described 'like a half-smothered fire."
Aunt Pullet unveils her hat in 'a darkened room in which the outer light entere[d] feebly' is suggestive not only of Miss Havisham's room in Great Expectations, but also of the lady's own spirit repressed by social constraints.
Similarly, Maggie can be seen rebelling 'against her lot' when she cuts her hair and expressing her repressed passions in the crucifixion of her doll with 'three nails driven into the head."
In many instances, her position seems similar to slavery.
Mrs Tulliver refers to her as 'a brown skin...mulatter,'  a 'bit of furniture...on which she could bestow her anxiety."
Her subsidiary role in the family is consolidated by her aunts and uncles displeasure in her 'brown' 'gypsy' appearance.
However, these consanguine criticisms are inconsequential compared to the fraternal dominance Tom holds over Maggie.
Tom promises 'always to take care of her, make her his housekeeper, and punish her when she did wrong."
According to old Wakem 'we don't ask what a woman does, we ask who she belongs to,' reducing women to mere chattel.
Whilst, Mr Tulliver views women as 'obtrusive flies."
Philip remarks that 'Maggie's dark eyes remind[ed] him of the stories about princesses being turned into animals."
Subjected to these humiliations and the conditional rather than unconditional love shown by her family, Maggie seems to degenerate into sadomasochistic behaviour by clinging to those who impede her growth because 'the need of being loved would always subdue her."
In Darwinian fashion this 'small mistake of nature' will not survive because she is too modern.
Her anagnorisis comes when she acknowledges the social barrier between genders; 'you are a man Tom, and have power, and can do something in the world."
Her female gender limits her from achieving the noble magnificence won by traditional tragic heroes.
Eliot reinforces the reader's pity by focusing on the inequality of education.
The opportunity of intellectual advancement is reserved only for Tom under the tutelage of Mr Stelling.
According to Mr Tulliver 'a woman's no business wi' being so clever' so instead Maggie must attend the occasional class at Miss Firniss's school.
When she visits Tom at Mr Stelling's house Phillip Wakem notices the 'unsatisfied intelligence' in her eyes.
The reader's sense of frustration in compounded by Tom's 'bovine' dull intellect, on which the 'lessons had left a deposit of vague, fragmentary, ineffectual notions."
Like Pip, Tom's education 'had simply glided over him, leaving a light deposit of polish."
These sequences of pity lead to Maggie's hamartia, which comes at the Guest's party, when she decides 'this one, this last night, she might expand unrestrainedly in the warmth of the present without those chill, eating thoughts of the past and the future."
This decision leads her into the greenhouse with Stephen Guest where he kisses her and their relations are changed until Maggie's moment of peripeteia, when like Tess from Thomas Hardy's  Tess of the D'Urbervilles she awakens from 'this strong presence that seemed to bear her along without any act of her own will' and refuses to elope with Stephen, knowing full well ' the irrevocable wrong that must blot her life had been committed.'
Dickens labelled his Great Expectations as a 'grotesque tragi-comic conception,' thus signalling his incorporation of tragic elements in the novel.
Dickens creates both Pip and Estella as orphans, vehicles that Victorians bereft of old traditions, might identify with.
Estella tells Pip 'we are not free to follow our own devices, you and I,' they are 'the lonely...battered slowly like pebbles into fortuitous shapes,' as products of their turbulent society.
Estella is portrayed as a puppet 'brought up by Miss Havisham to wreak vengeance on all the male sex."
Despite Estella's 'proud impatience' and educated elegance she remains the product of Miss Havisham's diseased mind.
I am reminded of the monster in Mary Shelley's Frankenstein when Estella cries 'I am what you have made me.
Take all the praise, take all the blame; take all the success, take all the failure; in short, take me."
The original ending evokes extreme pity for the woman, who only learns to feel after being subjected to 'suffering.'
Other female characters in the novel are also subordinated.
Mrs Hubble 'held a conventionally juvenile position, because she had married Mr Hubble,' the dim-witted Mrs Pocket remains unintelligent because she had been 'brought up from the cradle...as one...to be guarded from the acquisition of plebeian domestic knowledge,' whilst Mr Jaggers housekeeper, Molly, is told 'you have been admired, and can go' after being forced to reveal the scars on her wrist.
Even Biddy 'the wisest of girls' is forced to conform in her marriage to Joe.
Interestingly, Dickens also stimulates sympathy for his male characters by portraying them with feminine qualities.
Much like Philip Wakem in Mill on the Floss, Joe 'with the touch of a woman' provides Pip with the female tenderness and unconditional love he does not receive from his sister.
Similarly, the reader in inclined to trust Pip's friend Startop, who is described as having a 'woman's delicacy of feature...exactly like his mother."
In contrast to these characters is Pip, whom despite his first person narration, the reader is inclined to criticise for his treatment of Dickens pitiable characters and his quickly developed hubris.
Ashamed of his home, Pip commits his harmartia by accepting Mr Jaggers proposal.
He quickly bids farewell to the 'monotonous acquaintances' of his childhood and confesses ' I was beginning to be rather vain of my knowledge."
He revels when Mr Pumblechook addresses him as 'sir,' and he immediately puts on airs and graces to distance himself from Trabb's boy and seeks to 'make Joe less ignorant and common, that he might be worthier of my society."
I am critical even in his love for Estella, in which I am reminded of Othello's adulation of Desdemona in Shakespeare's Othello.
It is a 'jealous' love inspired and fuelled by social ambition.
Much like the schizophrenic behaviour of Othello, John Carey has commented on the symbolic use of fire that can be traced throughout the novel and is representative of "the criminal passions that lurk within" Pip and link him to Magwitch.
It has been theorised that Pip unconsciously endorses Drummle's victimisation of Estella, Orlick's revenge upon Mrs Gargery and the burning Miss Havisham.
Indeed, Pip's moment of peripeteia occurs on the realisation that Magwitch is his benefactor and he wishes 'that he had left me at the forge - far from contented, yet, by comparison, happy!"
Jeannette King defends those Victorian novelists criticised for their over emphasis on pathos, arguing this "is not a negative effect, a token of failure to achieve tragedy, but the result of deliberate emphasis on passivity, helplessness and dull monotony by novelists concerned with working these concepts into a total and new version of tragedy."
To evoke the fear necessary for tragedy both Eliot and Dickens resort to the Gothic.
When staying with the gypsies Maggie's imagination strays into images of cannibalism and feels sure they will 'kill her as soon as it was dark, and cut up her body for gradual cooking."
Eliot links past and present with the eerie legend of St Oggs and the mysterious prophetic writings ' browned by time' in the margin of a book given to her by Bob Jakin.
In contrast, Dickens shocks his readers from the very beginning.
The appearance of Magwitch 'soaked in water, smothered in mud and lamed by stones' from behind the grave of Pip's parents, awakens 'mortal terror' in both Pip and the reader.
Similarly, Magwitch tells the young Pip that if he does not keep his promise a cannibalistic man will 'softly creep...his way to him and tear him open."
This traumatic experience is revived throughout the novel with visitations from similar convicts flashing the file that helped Magwitch escape or the reappearance of the convicts leg-iron used to injure Mrs Gargery.
The 'waxwork and skeleton' figure of Miss Havisham is not dissimilar to the witches in Shakespeare's Macbeth when she emits ghastly 'low cries' and has 'a whirl of fire blazing all about her,' even Pip notices the 'positively dreadful ...energy of her looks."
Pip's guilt prompts him twice to see illusions of Miss Havisham 'hanging to the beam.'
Dickens often employs "antisocial" landscape to embellish this theme of fear.
The unearthly inner landscape of Sattis House, bathed in darkness and the horrific description of Miss Havisham's wedding cake overrun with ' speckled-legged spiders,' ' mice' and 'black beetles."
Even the gardens surrounding the house are unnatural, where the snow never melts and the 'grass grows in every crevice."
However, like the Red Deeps in Mill on the Floss, Sattis House provides refuge and retreat respectively, for Maggie and Miss Havisham, qualities integral to the 'antisocial landscape' according to Pauline Fletcher.
Similarly, in Richmond 'ancient trees...[are] cut into fashions as formal and unnatural as the hoops and wigs and stiff skirts' belonging to the inhabitants.
For Dickens, Capitalist London is ' rather ugly, crooked, narrow and dirty,''asmear with filth and fat and blood and foam.'
Jeannette King highlights that for many critics "the lower classes [were] inappropriate subjects for tragedy.
Their social position deprives their fall of any wider significance."
However, Eliot does establish elements of the heroine in Maggie.
Like many of Shakespeare's tragic heroes blinded by ambition, Maggie's thoughts 'were the oddest mixture of clear eyed acumen and blind dreams,' she is determined to 'be a clever woman."
She is 'gifted with that superior power of misery,' yet has strength capable of 'making out a faith for herself without the aid of established authorities."
These qualities raise her above the humble characters being criticised and lends majesty to her suffering.
On the whole, however, Eliot substitutes the Aristotelian protagonist of noble or majestic birth, with Maggie, a provincial daughter of nature, ideal for promoting the nostalgic longing for a rural past experienced by so many Victorians.
She also replaces the happy, assimilative endings stressed in Goethe's bildungsroman with the traditionalist cathartic death of Maggie and her brother Tom in the flood.
Jeannette King stresses "the appeal of the tragedies of the past seems to be partly that they are past.
Lacking the distancing effect of time, the modern would-be tragedian was required, therefore, to employ artistic devices to achieve the same distance - to veil the existence of evil in poetic form."
Indeed, Eliot's controversial ending has produced divergent opinions among critics as to what this catastrophic event implies.
Susan Fraiman highlights some of the possibilities; "an androgynous reunion, incestuous orgasm, the climax of a long suicide...perhaps sororicide, [or] authorial revenge."
Whilst, Patricia Ingham sees "the destruction of the restrictive community [and] the fulfilment of incest fantasy."
I believe the description of the river Floss at the beginning of the novel with its 'dark, changing wavelets' is reminiscent of Maggie's hair, equating the two as one entity.
Such an interpretation might prompt Feminist readings of the flood as the welling up of female anger, which destroys the barriers between female and male.
In other feminist enquiries the waters have been compared to the amniotic fluid released at birth, signalling Maggie and Tom's return to childhood and a state of innocence.
The over determined conclusion might just be the simple fulfilment of the curse that 'when the mill changes hands, the river's angry' symbolizing 'nature repair[ing] her ravages."
Ultimately, I believe Tom's death is more significant than Maggie's because in killing Tom Eliot is able to symbolically enact the death of the patriarchy that has hindered Maggie's development.
Darwinian ethics dictate that Maggie the overreacher cannot survive.
What does become clear is the inter-relatedness of Tom and Maggie's lives.
In a statement to publisher John Blackwood Eliot herself described the novel as 'the history of two closely related lives.'
Jerome Buckley concurs that "we must not ignore the declared duality of purpose."
Indeed, perhaps the novel can be considered as two bildungsromans interwoven, in which their "simultaneous deaths mark a moment when their narratives collide for the last time."
Indeed Fraiman states, "if Tom indicates the work's nominal status as bildungsroman, Maggie's problem...is her inability to enter the designated mode.
The novel is structured by her vain attempts to participate in the genre."
It seems then that Maggie's identity is not formed independently, but in response to Tom's decisions.
Her attempts to learn Latin and earn money by sewing are examples of her fruitless efforts to make Tom's Bildung her own.
In life she is Gilbert and Gumar's 'Madwoman in the attic' unable to develop and caught in a cycle of childlike behaviour.
Her aspirations to Bildung are only fulfilled in death, when she is immortalised in the legend of St Oggs.
Unlike Pip who returns to his roots eventually, Maggie is left 'a lonely wanderer' with 'no home.'
At the suggestion of Bulwer Lytton, Dickens revised his original ending for Great Expectations, this time opting for an optimistic tone.
However, critics like John Forster felt that although the official ending was marginally happier, it was 'less consistent with the drift, as well as natural working out, of the tale."
Indeed the original ending was praised for its 'flat tone and refusal of romantic expectation' that the revised ending seems to fall into; Pip gushingly confesses the truth to Magwitch and Estella's suffering has finally 'given her a heart."
Like Eliot, Dickens adds a cyclical element to his novel by renaming Joe and Biddy's son, Pip.
There is a sense that the same mistakes will be repeated when Pip sees the image of himself in the young boy and places him on ' a certain tombstone,' the same one that Magwitch had placed Pip on years earlier.
In a sense, Pip's great expectations and 'wanderings' were wasted dreams, similar to Maggie's intellectual ambitions.
Much like the flood in Mill on the Floss, Pip's illness perhaps signals a moment of rebirth, after which he is able to experience his true anagnorisis when he finally accepts his place among the marshes of Kent.
Accordingly, just as Maggie was unable to 'run away from her shadow,' Estella is able to shed this shadow self, symbolic of social restraint.
Dickens revised conclusion offers a brighter future, as we are reminded of Milton's Paradise Lost when Pip and Estella leave the 'ruined place' of Sattis House hand in hand.
In conclusion, it seems both Eliot and Dickens found the facets of tragedy ideal for exploring the topics that were the cause of the doubt and fear endemic to Victorian society.
They used their novels as vehicles to teach and where possible provide comfort through comedy.
They were able to convey their realist views on social class, gender relations and education, whilst purging their "yearning for an earlier society that was supposed to be idyllically integrated and morally pristine."
Indeed, Eliot was concerned with exploring the relationship of the past to the present.
She saw "tragedy as the universal experience," so she opted for the traditional catharsis, or purging of emotion that Maggie and Tom's death delivers to the reader.
In an ironic twist Eliot destroys her champion for the liberated female, perhaps too afraid to openly challenge Victorian morality and keen to restore the stability her society craved.
Sandra Gilbert feels "Eliot becomes entangled in contradictions that she can only resolve through acts of vengeance against her own characters."
Alternatively, Dickens opted for a modernist denouement that lacked finality but paved the way for a new version of tragedy, preferring to leave his readers is an emotional stasis and in doing so reserving and concealing his final conclusions on social reality.
The term 'post-modern' is broadly used but very difficult to define, perhaps because it is the term with which society, art and culture today is most commonly linked to.
In this instance, however, post-modern is used to describe the poetry produced after the modernist era and post world war two.
Poetry at this time in America was particularly diverse, with poets trying to move away from or develop the conventions of the poetic past.
There were many groups of poets who emerged after the Second World War, and these groups all experimented with different methods in their own ways.
The three major groups were, firstly, the Beat Generation  with people such as Lawrence Ferlinghetti and Allen Ginsberg.
Secondly, the Black Mountain School , including Charles Olsen, Robert Creeley and Denis Levertov.
There was also another hugely influentail group named the New York Poets who actcively tried to go against the poetic traditions which dominated poetry before the 1950s as well as experimenting with the language of poetry.
Frank O'Hara with his essay Personism: A Manifesto is considered to have been the figurehead of the New York Poets .
He joined forces John Ashberry and Kenneth Koch when they met in university and began a revolt against the old conventions and attempted to construct 'new concepts pf the poem' 1.
I have decided to concentrate on the New York School Poety and what emerged from the inspiration they gave because of the interesting and innovative ways of using language to express meaning, to give form aesthetically and emphasis the zeitgeist at a time when society was undergoing great change and the poets themselves knew the importance of language in popular culture and the avant-garde.
The New York School was the one most commonly associated with the avant-garde and as they especially took influence from France, the surrealist art, and the political ideas they are particularly interesting as they did not attempt to be inclusive to developing an American poetic voice, but one of an empire of poetry from America to Europe.
Ironically, though, they were also trying to make poetry more personal and make it a piece from the writer to the subject and almost excluded the wider reader.
At the time and thereafter it has been argued that poetry as a literary form is dying because it "has become the most private, least accessible of the arts" 2.
It could be argued that as these New York poets tried to bridge the gap between America and Europe, and experiment artistically they were also responsible for the decline of poetry.
I have chosen Frank O'Hara to open this anthology with two of his poems The Old Lady Died and Meditations in an Emergency.
These poems both exemplify what O'Hara said he was trying to do and how he adapted his own style: I don't even like rhythm, assonance, all that stuff.
You just go on your nerve...
But how can you really care if anybody gets it, or gets what it means, or if it improves them.
Improves them for what?
for death?
Why hurry them along?
Printed inside the front cover of the Faber and Faber edition of The Waste Land and other poems Conrad Aiken, New Republic, is quoted to have written: It is possible to suggest that in fact T.S.
Eliot does not invite the reader to understand the text.
However, it is possible to 'make sense' of the poem through an understanding of how the text was written, and how it came to be written.
Cultural Materialism holds the view that "The literary text...is always part and parcel of a much wider cultural, political, social and economic dispensation...the literary text is directly involved in history."
By looking at The Waste Land from this perspective it is possible to 'make sense' of the text and understand it as a literary piece that has arisen through a period of historical culture.
Eliot is regarded to be one of the great literary icons of the Modernist movement which developed radically through the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
Modernism rejected previously established forms and artistic ideals.
Evident in The Waste Land is the breakdown of chronology in literature and the shift towards the process of reflection.
The Waste Land has been linked with James Joyce's Ulysses as well as with non-literary works, which share aspects that allow us to identify them as being Modernist works of art.
Such works "originally signified cultural disruption and radically new ways of interpreting the world".
However, readings of The Waste Land from a 'post-modern' perspective have placed it within the literary canon.
In order to 'make sense' of the text, Rodrigues and Garratt propose ways in which a reader should focus on the text as a piece of Modernist literature.
Their suggestions are strongly related to the methods of textual analysis employed by Cultural Materialists; "to work on the material - the words, the shapes"; "to piece together the references, allusions and collage-like nature of the material"; and "to situate the works historically and critically so that their difficulty is translated into effective meaning and feeling."
It is arguably these methods that can best help a reader 'make sense' of The Waste Land.
Through the application of Cultural Materialist ideas about contextual significance in textual analysis, it is possible to understand the text through the way in which it subverts hegemonic forms.
Modernist artists were in part, reacting against the established and accepted lavish narrative techniques of the Romantic period.
The most obvious evidence of this within the text is its form and structure.
It is divided into sections, or books, much like some of the epic poems written by Romantic poets, for example Milton or Keats.
However, despite passages of narrative, Eliot's verse becomes fragmented and more abstract.
A clear example is the transition of the narrative passage at the beginning of 'A Game of Chess' into a more disjointed form: The passage is a clear introduction and can be credited with classic poetic techniques, for example the assonance between the words 'throne' and 'Glowed'.
However, line 110 indicates a development of both language and style.
The verse moves into a dialogic passage between what we might assume to be a male and female.
One could suggest that this is linked to the literary modernist technique of "Rework[ing] slang and argotic expressions of everyday encounters into the texture of ... prose and verse."
The technique of collage was popular among Modernist artists across a wide range of genres.
Eliot, together with other writers like Guillaume Apollinaire employed this technique as is evident in this shift in style.
Thus, the text can be seen to be undermining previously accepted realist styles of writing and replacing them with a reflective collage of reality.
Written in 1922, The Waste Land not only subverts traditional classical forms, but also established ideals of society.
In "The Burial of the Dead", Eliot manipulates and challenges hegemonic Romantic ideas about nature in order to evoke immediately the sterility of the modern experience.
George Williamson comments on the "paradox of the seasons" which "inverts the attitude towards the life-cycle...giving an ironic turn" to the text.
This is related to the modernist interrelation of memory and desire, which was largely due to the work of Freud and psychoanalysts alike.
In Williamson's observations it is possible to identify such themes within these opening lines.
"Spring disturbs the dead land, stirring memory and desire; winter lets it forget."
Cultural Materialism allows us to 'make sense' of the text as part of a political artistic movement which used art as the basis of a social critique of conservative expectations.
Cultural Materialism applies a Marxist critique and attempts to identify within a text, power relationships which reflect how society is a construction of contesting sites of power.
Understanding the text on this level might suggest that it is one which concerns and questions identity and reality.
The poem moves swiftly through a multitude of fictional characters.
In particular the various female figures that are represented might reflect a societal ignorance towards identity and a sanctioning of man.
Cultural Materialism employs various methods of textual analysis in order to 'make sense' of a text.
Although he is perhaps not considered a cultural materialist, Mikhail Bakhtin's idea of how the novel is built upon varieties of social vocabularies also evokes the importance of the text's own historical culture.
Through observing The Waste Land on this level, it is possible to illustrate how Eliot presents this ignorance of identity and authority of man.
It is possible to divide 'A Game of Chess' into three sections, each of which focuses on a different female figure.
All of these women, in a sense, are reflective of an artificial, infertile society.
The first is presented through a narrative voice whose sensual language evokes a sexuality suggesting it is male.
Indeed, this female figure has been interpreted as being a prostitute.
This is also evident in the contrast drawn between the aristocratic and lavish surroundings, and 'her strange synthetic perfumes' , which suggests that she does not belong there.
The perfume, itself, is used as a metaphor, suggesting that although this woman is outwardly secure, she is inwardly 'troubled, confused' ; her appearance is false.
The lines 111 - 139 introduce us to a woman whose own heteroglossia suggests she is hysterical.
Her irrational threat to 'rush out as I am, and walk the street'  is suggestive of her hysteria.
She appears to represent a weaker sex and modern infertility and thus empowers the male sex.
In the final section the dominant speaker can be read as a female publican whose heteroglossia is more fluent, but expressive only of gossip and thus remains artificial; there is no depth.
The presentation of these women as being infertile and lacking true identity through the use of different voices and vocabularies seems to empower man over them.
Eliot uses language to perhaps challenge identity and break away from realist and symbolic art forms.
Literary modernists were often concerned with the exploration of the "relationship of words to reality" and "attempt to set in crisis accepted ways of coding and understanding a changing world."
Cultural Materialism allows an interpretation of Eliot's "creative play with words" as an exploitation of identity and empowerment through the absence of the Romantic notion of 'self', where the poet is omnipresent.
There is no continuous narrator or identifiable voice, which seems to alienate the reader; we could question if we are ever spoken to directly.
The way in which the speaker changes constantly, suggests that none of them are given power over us; through isolating the reader, the text refuses us any sense of power also.
However, many of the figures portrayed are in some way victims of society, both pre-modern and modern; Cultural Materialism allows us to suggest that Eliot's cathartic work perhaps empowers these figures by articulating their inner anxieties rather than asserting a power over the reader.
Cultural Materialism adopts Structuralist methods of textual analysis, considering that "meaning in language only arises from differences and relationships along the chain of signifiers."
It is therefore possible to 'make sense' of The Waste Land through exploring the way that it is structured around a number of binary opposites.
Cultural Materialism also insists that texts are "absolutely inseparable from their historical context."
Practitioners approach literary texts in the same way as other texts; they aim to "...trace and bring to light relations of power and process of ideological and cultural construction."
Thus, not only is it possible to understand the text on the basis of its binary structure, but take the analysis one stage further and read these oppositions as "time - and place - bound verbal construction[s] that [are]...in one way or another political."
A dominant binary opposition is that of life and death; fertility and infertility.
The reversal of ideas about the seasons in the opening lines draws attention to this.
The 'lilacs' are symbolic of new life and fertility which grow from the 'dead' and infertile land.
Taking into account when and where the text was written might suggest that this opposition is a comment of dissent within a post-war culture.
New technologies of the modern period allowed society to see the effects of the First World War; the previous belief in the 'nobility' of war was called into question.
Within such a context, the binary opposition of life and death is particularly prominent.
In book three, 'The Fire Sermon', it is made significantly poignant through the use of war-like images.
Furthermore, the amalgamation of senses in lines 185-6 embodies this opposition, illustrating 'life' through the human sense of touch: 'cold blast', but also implying 'death' through the way the speaker can 'hear / The rattle of the bones'.
The First World War went further to effect behaviour and expectations, particularly in social, sexual and gender relations.
Through employing Cultural Materialism it is possible to detect this through the representation of emotions and relationships within the binary structure of the poem.
There appears to be two sides of sexuality within the text both of which diminish the possibility that sex can bring regeneration, cultural or personal.
One of the sexual dimensions represented could be described as a dry, baron interchange inseparable from neurosis and self-destruction.
This is particularly clear in the scene described by Tiresias in lines 230 - 256 which illustrates "a seduction seemingly without any love or passion".
The typist displays no desire to engage in sexual activity, "but no desire to resist seduction".
In the lines 249 - 56, the only sensation expressed is one of relief; she is 'glad it's over.'
Similarly Eliot's 'young man carbuncular['s]' experience lacks sincerity: 'His vanity requires no response, / And makes a welcome of indifference.'
The second side of sexuality represented in The Waste Land is of a rampant and fecund nature associated with a lack of culture and rapid aging.
This is illustrated boldly in the characterisation of the landlady in the third section of 'A Game of Chess' through her re-telling of a conversation with Lil, whose "rejection of her offspring " once again emphasises the loss of the regenerative values of sex.
Once again, by looking at the text as a piece of modernist writing, it is possible to assert that the text is making a subversive comment on the "transgression of previous sexual protocols and rules in personal life".
Thus, a Cultural Materialist reading enables us to 'make sense' of the poem not only as a literary text, but as a work that embodies and evokes its own cultural context.
Some of the key ideas of Cultural Materialism derive from the work of Raymond Williams, who asserted that texts of the past should be used to 'read' the present, "Revealing politics of our own society by what we choose to emphasise or suppress of the past."
This theory can be applied to the text on two levels, the first being a broader analysis of how the text is written.
The Waste Land is structured around various literary references and significant myths, in particular those of the Fisher King and the Quest of the Holy Grail.
Patrick Mooney suggests that the way in which Eliot has used these "underlying myths" allows the text to "comment on the modern world" and "describe modern cultural emptiness within the context of ancient myths of a heroic quest that gives meaning and relevance to life."
On a second level, The Waste Land can be used to 'read' our own post-modern 'present'.
A particular focus within the text is that of the city; London.
The urbanisation and expansion of cities was of particular significance during the early modern period.
Eliot's repeated phrase 'Unreal city', however, might have an added depth when reading the text today.
Like Eliot, many artists articulated the consequent feelings of isolation caused by the expansion of streets and buildings in cities.
Cities in the present day can still seem daunting because of their busy and almost 'unreal' atmosphere.
Cultural Materialism allows us to read the text not only as an expression of the new modernity of the early twentieth century, but relates it to how that modernity has shaped our own 'post-modern' world.
Cultural Materialism enables the reader to 'make sense' of The Waste Land on a number of different levels.
In a sense, the poem as a whole might never be fully understood or explained.
However, through working on the material in terms of structure and language; observing and focusing on the allusions and references within the text, and finally setting it in its historical and cultural context, Cultural Materialism opens endless channels of interpretation.
This essay has recognised this piece as one of the leading modernist literary works, which embodies the dissident voices and anxieties of the period in relation to both the past and present.
The fragmented style seems to express the period of change, and its ambiguities raise many pertinent questions relating to various significant issues such as identity, sexuality and, indeed, the culture of modernity itself.
For authors, language is their vessel which carries the whole of their work and provides the opportunities to enrich their characters, plot and the spectacle of the text.
In drama, whether it is the language they give the characters or language to direct and produce the setting; it is always the key in any performance.
Shakespeare and Marlowe were both sterling examples of Renaissance English writers who pioneered the use of language in their works, be it prose, poetry or drama.
Richard III and Dr. Faustus are a great starting point with which to investigate the relationship between language and spectacle, and how the two different authors dealt with this dynamic.
In both of these texts, spectacle would mean a striking performance; something entertaining to the public, unusually noteworthy and dramatic, as they were both intended to be played to an audience.
Language throughout both of the plays gains opulence and creates spectacle in differing ways, as well as some of the uses of language being much more traditional and unsuccessful than others.
The relationship between the two, though, is based on a culmination of many contributory factors such as the genre, setting, and audience at which they are aimed.
Dr. Faustus has two texts, commonly referred to as the A and the B text, the latter being produced more than a decade after the other , and being much longer than the first.
It also would have been subject to the change in censorship laws in 1606, which would have resulted in the addition of comic scenes and, to some extent, the lessening of the direct use of religion found in text A 2.
I will be examining text A, from the Norton Anthology of English Literature  in this instance, as it is a good example of the use of language for a stage production before the censorship and was possibly one of the last, widely seen productions of its kind before 1606.
The opening of Dr. Faustus is in the form of a prologue, traditionally presented by the chorus who appears throughout to narrate and be a trustworthy, measured voice among the course of the play.
The story of Icarus, from Greek mythology is used in the prologue to compare to the flight which Faustus embarks on, and leaves some clue as to his downfall; apart from this being a good story with which to compare Faustus, it also may leave possible, the presumption that Humanist theory may play a part in this play as the Humanist around at the time took a great interest in the world of the ancient Greeks and Romans 3.
These opening twenty-eight lines introduce the divine influence and conflict which will come, and even from such an early point the 'heavens' are depicted as a force which has 'conspired' against Icarus and therefore by comparison, may already be conspiring against Faustus.
Faustus is located in Wittenberg, which the audience may know, is the same place where Martin Luther was while the beginnings of the Reformation were unfolding, therefore allowing the audience to know that Faustus will be knowledgeable in the ways of Protestantism.
Language changes from the use of rhetoric in the prologue, to Faustus' own when he introduces himself in third person, as if he too is watching the action unfold alongside the audience.
It is in this opening speech that he appears to come to terms with the harsh reality of the religious life in which he is stuck, quoting from the bible: Already his use of language is that of discontent, and it is almost gaining the sympathies of the audience because it seems a bleak outlook to be forever trapped in this 'everlasting death'.
In true Renaissance man fashion, Faustus aspires to overcome his fate and make himself all-powerful and godlike; he declares to do this in the somewhat unconventional and unorthodox acquisition of skills in magic; Faustus, then proceeds to dismiss such traditional forms of knowledge like philosophy, law and divinity, as 'unpleasant, harsh, contemptible, and vile,'.
Magic, would have certainly been viewed by the audience as a dangerous practice, and certainly going against the will which God would like people to follow.
The audience at this point would be aware that Faustus' trouble later in the play has been consciously brought on by himself and his steer away from the path of God.
This is similar to declaration Richard makes at the beginning of Richard III, announcing himself as taking on the role of the 'villain', which will be discussed later.
With the use of language suspense is being built here, because the audience is being prompted of the spectacle which will be shown to them in the forthcoming events; magic will obviously be playing a big part in the play, and the audience will apprehensive as to what spectacle Dr. Faustus can produce.
It is not long after this that Faustus summons Mephastophilis and an event quite spectacular in it's stage presence is shown to the audience; the signing of the contract in blood.
As Mephastophilis is summoned, language shifts into blank verse to accentuate the shift in tone to something much darker, disobedient and less ordered in orthodox terms.
There are constant references in Faustus' speech to the attainment of power, and that he will overcome the will of God who will not be as mighty as him when he has magical powers.
It is arguable here that Marlowe's voice and opinions against Calvin's notion of predestination are being voiced through Faustus, as Faustus denies that man must be trapped by a tyrannous God, and that one should 'always be obedient to my will,'.
However, this emerges as a very confused argument because the only way Faustus can gain power and achieve this freedom is by being bound to Lucifer, and of course without God there would be no Lucifer.
Mephastophillis, though, does explicitly warn Faustus of the danger such a binding to Beelzebub will bring, and that there is a worse fate upon him in the hands of the devil compared to the hands of the Lord, : Scene 5 is the setting of Faustus' spectacular indulgent and ignorant act of conscious sin and betrayal against God whom has offered him 'means to bring thee into heaven,'  if only he would follow the path of 'contrition, prayer, repentance' .
The audience would, not doubt, have been stunned at this display when Faustus' 'blood congeals'  and the suspense heightens as fire is brought to melt it.
Following this, the inscription of 'Homo fuge!
',  appearing on Faustus' arm is an act which was obviously not magic, but would have seemed miraculous and spectacular to the audience.
This is a very significant moment, at a turning point in the play, when language and spectacle come together for full effect on the stage.
The significance of 'homo fuge' is so great because it is yet another warning, and this time one of the flesh, from God to Faustus prompting him to fly from the danger he in embarking upon and back onto the righteous path.
However for Faustus, the moment of 'Homo fuge!
', is quickly brushed aside by Mephasophilis and the 'DEVILS' which are directed to dance for him and present him with a crown and such like.
This reiterates to the audience with such a moment of spectacle that Faustus is unable to make his own decisions, and that there is great danger in being manipulated easily by others because he is now bound in contract to the devil as a consequence.
Another way of interpreting this scene would be that Faustus has no decision of his own to make, because either way he is surrendering to the will of God or the devil; this increasingly convinces the reader or audience, in quite spectacular fashion that the tragedy lies in how man is merely an instrument for the power struggle between 'good' and 'evil'.
With the use of language Marlowe is presenting the danger in being misled by others with bad intentions, and although Faustus is not trusting of conventional methods of knowledge, or Calvinist predestination, he is still treacherously trusting in anybody who presents him with something as simply attractive as magic tricks.
After the signing of the blood contract Faustus often summons his magic powers for use in many trivial manifestations and the seriousness of the consequences of what he has undertaken and often undermined by Mephastophilis because he needs to keep Faustus' soul to 'enlarge his [Lucifer's] Kingdom'.
One example of this would be when Faustus demands, and is then taken to Rome where he mocks, discredits and deforms the Papacy as a no longer sacred figure, but a corrupt one; Faustus is strongly defacing the head of the Catholic church here, firstly by snatching from him, then by telling him that crossing is a 'trick' and shouldn't be done, and thirdly by hitting him.
This short scene is a somewhat comic spectacle of mocking, considering the climate at the time toward the Catholics and how the were discarded, and mocked, this is a good example in blank verse how the common people of the country may have viewed the Catholic church and how the rise in Protestantism had no place for it.
Formerly more magic tricks which are performed for the Emperor and the Knight in scene nine, the Chorus appears and sets the scene, 'Faustus is feasted amongst his noblemen./What there he did in trial of his art/I leave untold: your eyes will be performed.'
At this point the audience knows the punishment which Faustus is facing for signing his soul to Lucifer, but they are about to be shown that he has only done so for these magic tricks of summoning 'those two descended princes' ; the question arises here as to whether Faustus deserves any sympathy as his language has suggested previously, for he has sacrificed something so great only to become a kind of court jester.
Before the final section of the play the audience are treated to an important demonstration of Faustus' acquired skills when he summons Helen of Troy in scene 12 after declaring, 'I do repent, and yet I do despair' , because his soul is arrested by Mephastophilis.
The summoning of Helen is the last demand Faustus places on Mephastophilis, and is one which he claims will, 'dissuade me from my vow: And keep mine oath I made to Lucifer,'.
However, the sight of Helen has the opposite effect on Faustus, and instead she is a symbol of freedom to him which is able to give him back his soul, as if she is a premonition of God and his pleas to her are those which he wishes to make in repentance.
This passage of language is elegant, well constructed and steeped in imagery of astronomy, which is a subject also considered dangerous at the time and draws on the complexity of Faustus' quest for new knowledge and self-gain; Faustus, here, is still obsessed with his vice of power, and possessing what had seemed unobtainable; be it the freedom of his soul, or now the love of Helen who is from an ancient story.
Faustus claims that as Helen, 'sucks forth my soul', he is able to 'see where it flies', as if he is free but we must be reminded that this is all an illusion brought on by Mephastophilis in Faustus' imprisonment.
In the final scene Faustus' fate becomes all too vivid, an unlike the merging of language and stage spectacle in with the summoning of Helen, the language, imagery, and its manifestation on stage become much darker and desperate.
Faustus continually pleads with God to save his soul and 'have mercy'  on it, but he is repeatedly denied and is describing literally being pulled down; 'Who pulls me down?'
.
There is no salvation for Faustus, and the Chorus finishes the play with a speech of warning to the reader/audience not to 'wonder at unlawful things' , because the fate of such a dabbling may be equally as dreadful.
Marlowe may well have borrowed the morality play structure from his predecessors, but the ending of Dr. Faustus clearly outlines that this is not a morality play of the orthodox kind, such as Everyman for example, where the ending involves the protagonist repenting, being forgiven and therefore having a conventional resolved conclusion; Amen, say ye, for saint charity.'
Everyman 914-921 In the end here, the people are united with God, unlike in Dr. Faustus where he is separated from him and the Chorus closes the play with words of caution, allowing the play to come full circle with the narrator.
However, the beginning of Richard III is not with a prologue introduced by a Chorus, but by Richard himself.
The opening soliloquy is quite spectacular itself with the introduction of Richard without any extra stage spectacle because it is made clear that the character of Richard is spectacle enough.
Richard's long speech , gives a clear outline of his 'unfashionable' , and 'deformed'  structure which, 'dogs bark at' , as if he is attempting to gain the sympathies of the audience; only before he shifts this but proclaiming his determination to 'prove a villain' .
There is little, if any sympathy towards Richard in the opening of the play, in comparison to some towards Faustus who faces a conflicting and confusing journey ahead of him, simply because he attempts to make better for himself, Richard, however, is celebrating himself as a villain and affirms that he will relent to gain power and cause tyranny.
This is an especially spectacular use of language and outlines the importance of Richard and how he will consistently command the attention of the audience, and the characters in the play with his spectacular use of language.
Richard professes that he is evil, and that he will usurp the power of those around him; this plays on the theme of the court and the role which the court held in the period when position and power was more important than anything, and as quoted from Stephen Greenblatt, 'evil comes not from the mysterious otherworld of demons but from this world, the world of court and family intrigue,' 4 perhaps then this story unfolding would not have been a surprise to the audience, but just another version of scandal entwined with entertainment for the audiences enjoyment.
Spectacle and shock are added to that of Richard's language soon after the opening section when Henry's dead body is left bleeding in the hearse and is 'set down' on stage as Richard woos Anne; The scene progresses and Anne cannot overcome Richard's dominance with language and she lapses into confessing, 'I hope so'  when Richard offers to lie with her in chambers.
From then on Richard dominates the speech and even uses sexual symbols like his 'sharp-pointed sword' , to entice her, which she is not able to refuse, nor does she seem to want to.
The inability of others to stand up to Richard and his use of language is a spectacular repetition throughout the play, rarely changing, and is a sign to the audience of why the Richard's tyrannous plan is able to succeed for so long.
Montainge wrote, 'many of this world's abuses are engendered - or to put it more rashly, all of this world's abuses are engendered - by our being schooled to fear to admit our ignorance and because we are required to accept anything which we cannot refute,' 5; this seems particularly apt here as Richard is not refuted until much later on and is therefore able to commit these numerous 'abuses'.
After Richard becomes protector in I.
3, his climb to become King becomes even more realised, but the audience are shown the first example of a near match in language, with a woman of all people.
Margaret, is depicted as a shrill 'lunatic' , but manages to effect Richard in way not done previously.
She manages to accuse him of 'murder to make him a king'  and persists with insults, calling him a 'dog' , 'abortive rooting-hog'  and, 'the slave of nature and the son of hell,' .
This early on Margaret, may seem wildly outspoken and even mad , but she seems the only one willing to mark out Richard as a villain.
Later on, the young princes also manage to do this and to taunt Richard in III.
1, but as a consequence he has them sent to the tower and kills them in order to usurp their power.
After Richard succeeds and is crowned King Richard III, his tyrannous plight begins to unravel with the help of Richmond, and this is where Richard's skill with language begins to backfire, diminish and leaves him powerless; Lest I revenge.-What, myself upon myself?'
After the ghosts of the people which Richard has had murdered appear to him, he seems confused, and this scene is another which unites language and spectacle on the stage and the fate of Richard is being unravelled, the common people are dissatisfied with his reign, and Richmond's language and calm and serene is gaining apace over his; Richmond's language, in comparison to Richard's is uniting and reforming, not dominating and manipulative.
This is obviously of a considerable less spectacular effect on the stage to cause shock and terror, but it is a imperative means to show how villainous Richard was and how he is overcome by the favoured and uniting force of Richmond.
Richard, finally meets his ends by being slain at the hands of Richmond , and to make the final speech of peace to the public; The peace with language in the resolution of Richard III, sets up a positive outlook towards the then monarch Elizabeth I, and with comparison to Richard III shows her in an increasingly positive light at a time when her popularity was waning.
Also, this resolution is a stark contrast to Dr. Faustus and the fate which befell him.
Both Dr. Faustus and Richard III have language at the centre of their stage spectacle, but as shown, it is a consequence of many different factors throughout the plays.
In Dr. Faustus that main area of spectacle is the role of magic, and the depiction of dark knowledge, such as the threat of astrology of the time.
Magic on the stage would have been a great show for the audience, but the character of Faustus and his many conflicts is the root of these magic tricks.
Richard III, however manages to create a greater spectacle just by the manifestation of the villainous Richard and his distortion of language; Richard III, is almost a Humanist distopia because it shows how language can be manipulated to meet the diabolical aspirations of anyone, no matter how evil, providing they have a skilful command of it.
The relationship between language and spectacle in both of the tragedies is one which is very closely intertwined, but in many occasions the power theories in Dr. Faustus are based around the stage tricks, deferring attention from the implications of the religious tone.
The subject of magic invites elaborate stage spectacle whereas Richard III offers a more thorough incite into the psyche of a character who is driven on a tyrannous track to power and destruction, with language as his main tool to accompany him in the power struggle.
Through "The Magic Box", Kit Wright gives access to his intimacy, his deep secrets and desires.
Our analysis of his poem will focus on two major points: the apparently disappointing effect of the title, and the unusual disposition of the poem as a whole.
Usually, the aim of a title is to set the tone and to announce what will follow; it is actually a play with our expectations as readers.
Here, we are before something very precise, as indicated by the definite article "the", a specific box that will become "my" box in the last two stanzas.
Moreover, the pre-modifying adjective "magic" conveys an idea of supernatural elements, so much so if we associate the expression with that of "Pandora's Box".
Thus, from the very title, the imagination of the readers is set into motion, taking them far away from reality.
But as we read along, we can feel a bit disappointed as though the title had deceived us inasmuch as magic does not seem obvious in these twenty-four lines.
Indeed, we only go as far as finding exoticism - from a Western point of view, that is - in the words "sari"  and "Gujarati"  that take us to India, or to China .
There actually is only one passage that could be associated with the notion of magic - the fourth tercet , where the addresser displays the powers of imagination through invention , an oxymoron  and a reversal between a witch and a cowboy.
On the whole, what in fact appears extraordinary is putting tiny as well as enormous things, or ideas, in this box, made of unusual matter as shown in the last but one quatrain .
Incidentally, the ternary rhythm line 17 does emphasize the particularities of the box, and the run-on line lines 19-20 seems to imitate the hinges of the lid.
And the magic of the poem does actually lie there - in the blending of manner and matter.
Indeed, although there is no rhyming scheme whatsoever, the anaphora of the phrase "I will put in the box", highlighted by the following blank space and the recurring enjambments that imitate the movement of putting something in some place, can be seen as a sort of incantation, an enchanting spell.
The two finite verbs we come across in the poem - "will put" and "shall surf"  - , indicate, on the same level, a strong intention and a flawless commitment from the addresser.
Many lines do reproduce the sound they signify, like the alliteration on the dental /t/, line 4, that imitates the sound of the tip of the tongue touching a tooth; or line 7.
I would therefore say that the title is not deceptive at all for magic is conjured up through the actual words and the meticulous layout of the poem.
It actually is something magical because a poem is a creation  and as such, magic is in Poetry itself.
As suggested in my previous conclusion, magic, i.e.
great imagination making you fly above reality so to speak, lies in Poetry.
My own response is 'poetic' in the sense that it is a creation, using and playing with language as a magic tool.
My text mainly shares one common point with the previous one - the action of putting things in a very particular box.
The way it is built is actually interesting because, in the first poem, the elements may be symbolic, even more so since they are emphasized thanks to a ternary rhythm .
We can only venture guesses: gold for preciousness, steel for strength and nobody will ever be able to force the box?
As for the second treasure chest, the stress is laid on the colour - green.
It commonly stands for Hope.
Yet, the shape is as important because the circle is the figure of harmony.
Furthermore, the atmosphere of the whole second part is 'poetic' and 'magic' owing to the sounds: throughout the first sentence, for instance, there is a mix of alliterations on the dentals /d/ and /t/ and on the fricative /s/ along with the assonance on /i/.
The confusion of the elements is also poetic: the water of the sea becomes the tears; the sentence standing on its own can refer to the weather outside but also implicitly refers to the inner feelings of the poet; the poet is dealing with abstractions that have turned concrete through language.
Let's eventually point out that the reader witnesses two different kinds of dialogue, that are in sharp contrast with the committed tone of the declaration of Wright's poem, where no real addressee can be found.
First, there is a reconstituted conversation between the poet and his closest friend: the question is given directly, having been rephrased .
The response could have been given in many ways and I have chosen to make a simple list.
As for the second dialogue, as specified by the verb "converse", it happens between the poet and the natural elements.
This piece of writing therefore establishes a dialogue between itself and the reader, who will go back and forth, inferring from the text, understanding it and creating his own world through the magic of words.
Gender is a hugely nebulous concept, representing it often proves as difficult as defining it; Butler goes so far as to argue that; 'There is no proper gender' believing all gender to be performance.
If so, Dickinson appears to suggest that speech is a formative part of this 'performance,' but the polarity established in her opinion is highly problematic as it utterly divides both men and women, and speech and silence.
The central weakness of her statement lies in its generality, as no one author or character is capable of representing the manifold aspects of an entire sex.
As a result, I am not trying to ascertain how valid Dickinson's opinion is, nor do I wish to debate the extent to which the texts disprove or support her argument.
Instead I am examining what people see as stereotypically gendered writing and characteristic of male and female in relation to speech.
I will however investigate what the binaries of speech and silence may be implying about gender.
I intend to concentrate on how each author uses language to create the voice or its absence, depict speech and generate eloquence.
Although not directly exploring Dickinson's verse, I will briefly examine her poetry in order expose how ambivalent her own portrayal of gender is.
Her work simultaneously supports and contradicts her opinion, again why I feel assessing its validity to be unfeasible and futile.
As I consider her individual viewpoints and politics impossible to ascertain with certainty, I tend not to investigative the concept and cause of dread, as I believe it generated by various personal and emotional factors irrelevant to an assessment on how gendered language is created and represented.
I have chosen to examine how gender, discourse and silence is rendered in Gilman's The Yellow Wallpaper and Hawthorne's The Scarlet Letter, in order to establish what similarities and differences emerge regarding the way in which male and female authors manifest their own gendered voices, take on those of the opposite sex, and depict men and women.
Drawing specifically on Gender and Feminist criticism, I wish to explore what social commentary regarding gender, if any, the authors seem to offer in their illustration of how silent or vocal the men and women in their work are.
Concentrating on the relevance and accuracy of established gender models in relation to speech and social role, I hope to discover how ingrained, reliable and veracious the gender stereotypes presented by Dickinson are in each text.
Men appear far from silent in Gilman's text, manifesting their voices and opinions with authority and confidence, literally and linguistically belittling the narrator.
Depicted as an authoritarian husband and respected doctor, John assumes a position of intelligence and reason that enables him to confidently dismiss his wife's illness as a; 'temporary nervous depression."
An impression of hegemonic male hierarchy is established by; 'My brother is also a physician, and also of high standing, and he says the same thing,' as a seemingly superior education unites the male figures in a position of intellectual strength indicative of privileged masculine dominance.
The colloquial; 'I take phosphates or phosphites-whichever it is,' instantly establishes the female as other to this, subordinate and at the mercy of male control in lacking the same advantaged medical knowledge.
'Personally I disagree with their ideas,' calmly and rationally sets the female protagonist up as oppressed and in opposition to male hierarchy by establishing a firm feminist undertone; 'I think sometimes that if I were well enough to write a little it would relieve the press of ideas and rest me.'
John explicitly infantilises the narrator, condemning her to a subsidiary position by condescendingly referring to her as; 'little girl' and 'blessed little goose."
Aligning the female to the same helpless, inconsequential position of a child, could be read as demonstrative of female dependency, as women were expressly reliant on men both socially and economically.
John's refusal to even allow her to walk unaided supports this; 'he gathered me up in his arms, and just carried me upstairs and laid me on the bed..and read to me."
Repeatedly interpolating the conjunction 'and' is reminiscent of childlike language and helps demonstrate how treating women in such a way diminished their dignity and confidence in their capabilities.
The asexual parental relationship established between them creates a resolute power imbalance where John is firmly dominant, as he; 'takes all care from me."
Demoted by her inability to fulfil her maternal obligations, the narrator is made obsolete, submerged in a demoralized sense of incompetence that drives her to create a new purpose in life, writing her journal; 'I must say what I feel and think in some way-it is such a relief."
The italicised modal verb generates a sense of insistency that demonstrates the force of female resolution.
Much Gender and Feminist criticism insists that language is an essentially masculine medium from which woman is excluded.
The female is consequently outside of language, struggling to find and create her own.
Such firm insistence on the need for women to find a medium that allows them to express their experiences with authenticity could be read as a feminist statement.
Copious first person personal pronouns embed the voice of a specifically female narrator in the text, allowing her to use language as a method of reversing her conventionally inferior marginality in assuming the position of centralised 'I.'
Within an otherwise circumscribed existence where she is silenced by her gender, control over narrative direction empowers the speaker by allowing her to experience the governance John takes for granted, while challenging Mills' belief that; 'We are still trapped within the notion of woman's language being deviant, powerless and submissive."
But because narratorial reliability crumbles, it becomes impossible to argue that the text entirely contradicts this statement as this collapse could be read as an intimation that female language is essentially weak and prone to breakdown.
The extent to which we can trust her narrative and judgement is contestable throughout.
Initially, logical and considered opinions suggest a strong sense of self in spite of oppression that engenders the reader's sympathy and confidence in the narrator, but her mounting paranoia steadily erodes this.
Such inconsistency makes the narrative multiple and fluid, specifically female characteristics according to French Feminist critics.
In agreeing with Humm that; 'gender is constructed through language and is visible in writing style,' it could be argued that Gilman is using a form of ecriture feminine to fortify the specifically female gender of the narrating voice as a method of enabling the protagonist to narrate her experience of what the men dismiss as a; 'slight hysterical tendency,' in an unimpeded and authentic manner.
Fetterly disagrees believing; 'she experiences anxiety, contradiction and ambivalence in the act of writing,' not because her voice is characteristically female but; 'because she is imprisoned in John's house and text."
If writing and language is seen as open only to the male, it could be argued that the collapse of the narration is inevitable, as masculine language is an ineffective medium for the female to use.
The text therefore may be an attempt to demonstrate the difficulty faced by women in trying articulate their voices within the constraints of masculine language.
Prohibiting the narrator's writing keeps her within the circumscribed confines of the domestic world and reinforces John's masculine supremacy; 'he hates me to write a word."
By repressing her voice, John drives her further towards madness in not allowing her to manifest her concerns; 'he looked at me with such a stern, reproachful look that I could not say another word."
John is expressly reported to talk far more than the narrator, using his power to manipulate language in order to dominate the verbal exchanges between them.
Finally verbalising an opinion that she is failing to improve, John corrodes her confidence and silences her by using comparatively longer and more dense syntax, repeated allusions to his Doctorial status and numerous patronising endearments.
It would appear that keeping her silent keeps her sane to him; 'I really do eat better, and am more quiet than I was.
John is so pleased to see me improve."
It is implied that had he adopted a position of silence in listening to her fears, she may have been saved from madness; 'So of course I said no more on that score..and lay there for hours trying to decide whether that front pattern.. really did move.'
The contrastive distinction between verbal and written communication demonstrates how problematic assessing the text in light of Dickinson's opinion is, due to the need to distinguish what we define as 'talk;' whether we take it to mean literal verbal manifestation of the voice, or narration.
Although vocal and authoritative in her narration, the general lack of direct speech and reporting clauses that pertain to her actually engaging in dialogue, imply that outside of her writing the narrator is condemned to a silent existence, peripheral and ignored because of her illness and gender.
On one of the rare occasions where she actually 'talks,' she uses; 'a quiet, a very quiet voice, with a most restrained manner,' therefore narrative writing becomes the only place she is allowed to 'talk' in a freely expressed 'voice.'
But, this 'voice' is a written voice as by 'talk' she essentially means write, in example; 'I will talk about the house."
By predominantly narrating thought and not speech, it could be argued that she is ultimately silent as only herself and the reader hear her voice.
Enumerable pauses and interruptions marked by asterisks continually disjoint the narrative, creating a lack of linearity again characteristic of the ecriture feminine.
They also generate a physical graphological space and emptiness on the page that may be representative of her silence outside of writing.
Ironically, the narrator is highly eloquent in articulating her madness, paradoxically remaining lucid and coherent in her descriptions of the wallpaper; 'The colour is repellent, almost revolting; a smouldering unclean yellow, strangely faded by the slow turning sunlight."
Alliterative consonance and heaped polysyllabic adjectives help draw the reader into her confusion.
This almost poetic use of language demonstrates a verbal artistry that is testament to her ability to express herself with linguistic dexterity.
Tactile olfactory imagery pertaining to the; 'yellow smell', overwhelms the senses making the vivid visual depictions easy to envision.
Personification and active dynamic verbs animate the paper's movement allowing us to understand how she comes to believe it is a live presence; 'imagine a toadstool in joints... budding and sprouting in endless convolutions."
The wallpaper, like her mind, lacks linear order, but although infectious and decaying both remain fertile and productive; 'There are always new shoots on the fungus."
It could be argued that the wallpaper in; 'committing every artistic sin,' may be a metaphoric representation of how many perceived women's writing as an unpredictable, sprawling and uncontrolled medium; 'up and down and sideways they crawl, and those absurd unblinking eyes are everywhere.'
Madness is a problematic concept; while demonstrative of the consequences of attempting to silence and confine women, it conversely seems to offer freedom from patriarchal subjugation; although the narrator becomes increasingly silent in her progressive insanity, she also appears more confident and self-assured; Like Hester to an extent, in silence she finds empowerment, as her assertive tone implies a sense of pride in her newfound purpose; the reader is therefore unavoidably both deeply disturbed and saddened by; 'life is very much more exciting now than it used to be...
I have something more to expect, to look forward to, to watch.'
The wallpaper may also be metonym for patriarchal dominance as it too; 'slaps you in the face, knocks you down, and tramples upon you."
Her fight with the wallpaper could be read as demonstrative of her fight to speak out against gender inequality.
But, it is depicted as an overwhelming force impossible to escape; enumerable heads illustrate the manifold forms of patriarchy, fortifying its power and emphasising the futility of her battle; 'But nobody could climb through that pattern-it strangles so, I think that is why it has so many heads."
Her failure to conquer it results in the loss of her mind and identity, a central thematic preoccupation fortified by the absence of her name and seeming metamorphosis into the woman in the wallpaper; 'I suppose I shall have to get back behind the pattern when it comes night."
The narrative voice merges with that of the imaginary figure making it difficult to ascertain who exactly is speaking, as the central 'I' collapses into a multiple persona.
I believe Humm's opinion substantiated by this reading; Utterly unimpeded direct discourse implies that madness allows the narrator to find her voice and achieve freedom of speech; '"I've got out at last" said I "In spite of you and Jane.
And I've pulled off most of the paper, so you can't put me back!"
Finally expressing herself without concern regarding how she will be perceived, in her mind the narrator has escaped and is victorious.
But, the reader is painfully conscious that doing so will probably result in her institutionalisation.
Seemingly unaware of the threat of this perennial entrapment, her perceptual freedom allows her to finally overthrow the patriarchal repression that has silenced her throughout.
Manifold gendered voices overlap with complexity in The Scarlet Letter.
Specifically aligning himself with Hester, her story of 'human frailty and sorrow' explicitly becomes Hawthorne's own to narrate.
Fuelled by his disillusioned disappointment in the men around him, Hawthorne initiates the central theme of hypocrisy in his depiction of 'the patriarch,' an inspector who is; 'so perfect in one point of view; so shallow, so delusive, so impalpable..in every other."
Images of decay illustrate the degeneration of patriarchy and strengthen the text's conclusive nuance that social evolution lies in centring society on female ethics; 'The angel and apostle of the coming revelation must be a woman."
Desiring to distance himself from these men drives Hawthorne to emphasise his understanding and compassion, stereotypically female characteristics that fortify our faith in his ability to manifest the female voice and persona; 'I experienced a sensation not altogether physical..of burning heat; as if the letter were not of red cloth, but red-hot iron."
Martin believes this moment makes Hawthorne and Hester one; I disagree to an extent believing Hawthorne's defence of those who live by their own morals not to be an attempt to demonstrate the plight of the ostracized female, but an effort to justify his desire to manifest his own voice through writing.
Hawthorne's well-documented sense of shame and inferiority in having chosen to do so enables him to empathise effectively with Hester's inner conflict and disgrace; '"What is he?"
murmurs one..of my forefathers.."A writer of storybooks!..what mode of..being serviceable to mankind..may that be?"'
In establishing enumerated similarities between himself and Hester, Hawthorne seems to be trying to validate his ability to assume the female voice.
Vehemently emphasising the parallels between them may be a method of bolstering his narrative authority; an attempt to demonstrate an admirable ability to understand and write the female voice in order to engender the respect and approbation he feels necessary to prove the worth of his work to himself and society.
But, the extent to which a man can accurately take on a woman's voice is questionable.
As male, Hawthorne holds a dominant linguistic and societal position making whether he can ever truly understand the position of other and subordinate debatable, as he is never excluded from hegemonic language and ideology.
If he has never genuinely been made external or silenced by his gender, it could be argued that he cannot truly empathise with Hester, so cannot authentically render her voice.
This further suggests that they can never become one.
If male and female speech are at opposites ends of a gendered linguistic power divide, their voices cannot be unified without antithetical fracture; the realism of Hester's female voice is therefore always contestable, as the heart of her voice is essentially male.
If we accept stereotypical definitions of male speech, this masculine core may be why her discourse is characterised by eloquence.
But, the text's representation of speech tends to challenge the accuracy of these gendered speech models.
The verbal interaction between Hester and Dimmesdale in the woods contradicts what are considered the typical characteristics of male and female speech.
Traditionally male language is defined as linear, ordered and rational, whereas female speech is seen as hesitant, illogical and disordered.
In applying these models, Dimmesdale appears comparatively feminine in speech, using elongated rambling syntax littered with caesuras, rhetorical questions and exclamations that generate a hysteria indicative of weakness and confusion; 'None!-nothing but despair!"
Conversely Hester is articulate and rational, using shorter fully formed, end-stopped sentences to calm and reassure him; 'You have deeply and sorely repented.
Your sin is left behind you."
She is almost like John here, adopting a paternal role in having to soothe and control Dimmesdale.
This impression is fortified by her organization and initiative in planning their escape; persuasive imperative verbs generate inspiration and energy allowing her to empower and fortify Dimmesdale with her own vigour; 'Preach!
Write!
Act!"
Imploring; 'Think for me Hester!
Thou art strong.
Resolve for me!"
establishes a disproportionate power division between them that allows Hester to linguistically and literally assume the dominant position, but unlike John she does not use it to manipulate and enervate Arthur.
In spite of holding a more 'masculine' position of control, Hester remains maternal and giving, continually sharing her strength; Language in the text is therefore explicitly made open to interpretation, as the implications generated by certain words are shown to be subject to dramatic alteration.
The nature of Hester's speech is impossible to generalise as its more 'male' attributes dissolve when she is overcome by forceful love; her discursive strength collapses into disjointed exclamatory discourse when faced with the possibility of losing Pearl; 'raising her voice almost to a shriek,' she cries; 'Ye shall not take her!
I will die first!"
Here Hester appears to conform to the stereotypical model of an impassioned female ruled by feeling, but retaining her aggressive tone challenges the expectations of age when women were traditionally passive.
Gender boundaries, like gendered speech therefore overlap.
As supposed 'male' and 'female' speech features are amalgamated in both characters, such discourse models seem an inadequate method of assessing gender and eloquence, as they tend to overly simplify the differences between them.
Hawthorne's depiction of silence is as contradictory as his representation of gender, as it is generated by and demonstrative of divergent characteristics.
Lacan defines women as absence and if we extend this perception of lack to the absence of voice, silence could be said to represent the notion of female as inadequate male.
Throughout the majority of the text Hester is a silent, remote presence, only unreservedly expressing her voice when outside of her circumscribed world in the woods, free like the natural world surrounding her.
The emphasis on Hester as a visual rather than vocal presence may support this interpretation; detailed descriptions of her external appearance imply that she is a figure who is seen more than heard, reducing her somewhat to the position of object, as she is often explicitly made a spectacle, described as aware of the; 'intense consciousness of being the object of severe and universal observation."
But, Hester also finds might in her silence, refusing to let her peripheral position quell her sprit or love; 'I might endure his agony, as well as mine."
Carrying the onerous secret for them both augments her strength, making her compassionate and self-sufficient; as one unable to look to others for support she is forced to draw on her inner-resilience.
Unlike Gilman's protagonist, she is not sent mad by; 'the strange and solitary anguish of her life,' as being ignored and ostracised liberates her by granting imaginative freedom.
Interaction between male protagonists differs greatly to that between women who openly admit their wrongs and pains, finding comfort in sharing and talk; 'people brought all their sorrows and perplexities, and besought her consul."
Conversely, Dimmesdale and Chillingworth use tense, loaded speech that engenders much dread; 'Alas, to judge from the gloom and terror in the depths of the poor minister's eyes, the battle was a sore one."
Fear, anxiety and Puritanical hypocrisy shape their exchanges; the need to maintain the façade of public self ironically ensures that there is very little honesty between them in spite of lengthy debate regarding its importance; Dimmesdale believes men are; In spite of copious sanctimonious moralising, Chillingworth is equally as deceptive, concealing his past, suspicions and true objective.
His speech is characterised by relentless psychological bullying, sinister unsettling insinuations and malicious threats that make him an ominous and menacing presence; 'His fame, his position, his life, will be in my hands.
Beware!'
It could be argued that the text does little portray men favourably; Arthur's explicitly; 'eloquent voice' also allows him to hide his true nature as it is; The purpose of Dimmesdale's oration is to engender the respect and admiration of his parishioners, which implies that he uses his rhetorical power to manipulate people's opinion of himself, not unlike Hawthorne.
Placing communal respect above self-respect, he is ultimately destroyed by the impossibility of his duel existence; 'I your pastor.. am utterly a pollution and a lie."
Like his speech, Arthur's silence is subject to his own control.
In spite of longing to; 'speak out, from his own pulpit, at the full height of his voice, and tell the people what he was,' his silence, unlike Hester's, is essentially self-inflicted, as being male grants him the power to choose to remain hidden behind the protection it offers.
As in the preceding text, his final gesture of empowerment is futile because self-destructive, as here too unimpeded speech ultimately leads to destruction.
Speaking freely at last, he rejects social approval and the silencing repression of patriarchy and religion, but is never shown to face the consequence of doing so.
The extent to which he becomes a true man in speaking aloud is therefore questionable.
Even during his dramatic confession, Dimmesdale is explicitly reliant on Hester imploring; 'Come, Hester, come!
Support me up yonder scaffold."
This image has firmly feminist undertones, as only when expressly supported by two women is he strong enough to manifest his real voice.
Hawthorne's predictive depiction of a matriarchal society is radical and progressive; This fortifies the novel's ubiquitous suggestion that social advancement is dependent on communities becoming more nurturing and accommodating.
This appears to corroborate Cixous' belief that celebrating the female as a symbol of plenitude and multiple capacity can reverse the Lacanian view of woman as lack.
If so, in opening up the feminine in himself and his writing, Hawthorne could be deemed Feminist.
According to Jouve; Hawthorne's depiction of Hester's 'fantastic ingenuity' and self-expression in needlework supports this, as embroidering the letter allows her to mark it with her own voice in spite of the silence it condemns her to.
Hawthorne's representation of Pearl seems to illustrate a new generation of women.
Her voice is subject to her control alone, she continually refuses to be silenced by Hester who on repeated occasions is forced to warn; 'Hush Pearl, hush!
Thou must not talk so."
Frequently questioning, she is free and unimpeded in speech, her voice making her confident and 'dauntless."
She resolutely refuses to adapt the way she talks, manifesting her opinions and queries without concern for their consequences; having learned from her mother's silent suffering, she actively reigns the power that speech can bestow upon the female.
Both texts demonstrate how divergent gender characteristics can be manifested in both speech and silence.
Each supports and disproves Dickinson's opinion on different occasions, helping advocate why I believe it to be too limited in its division to apply directly to either text.
The lack of continuity regarding each author's representation of speech and silence may be partly attributable to the impact of the individual writer's gender, but the extent of this influence is impossible to ascertain.
Because we will never know what personal and social factors motivate their depictions, how feminist either writer is, if at all, and their sexual politics are made impossible to establish with conviction.
Dickinson's poetry itself rarely makes overt statements regarding gender as she seldom inflects the speaking voice with a gendered identity, and even when she does, it is often tenuous and changeable.
Polarity and opposites pervade her verse and are suggestive of a dual attitude towards the issues raised in her poems on love and marriage.
Omitting certain words and multiple phrase meanings often make it difficult to discern how direct or ironic she intends her tone to be.
Poem 273 seems to imply that women are trapped and repressed by men; 'He put the Belt around my life/ I heard the Buckle snap."
A similar metaphoric suggestion of the cessation of freedom in marriage emerges in poem 1072, where elliptical progressions suggest that the birth of the wife results in the death of the woman who is; 'Born-Bridalled-Shrouded' Yet other poems depict strong women explicitly using speech to educate and bolster men, not unlike Hester does; 'when his power dropped-...
I cheered my fainting Prince-/ I sang firm-even- Chants-."
This substantiates Foster's belief that; Poem 199 uses speech marks to graphologically emphasize the labels and markings that shape female existence; 'I'm "wife"- I've finished that-/ That other state-/ I'm Czar- I'm "woman" now-/' Copious caesuras and prolific use of enjambment tend to generate indefinite conclusions, making her verse and standpoint highly ambivalent.
While certain undertones seem to mirror those manifested in the texts examined, they are not without contradictory elements and ironically demonstrate the difficulty of applying her own opinion to her work.
Although seemingly radical and feminist on occasion, no nuance is beyond contention.
Both texts in their representation of speech and silence reveal how narrow and restrictive gender ideologies can be by exposing how the culturally constructed differences that distinguish us as feminine and masculine, are subject to multiple variations ranging from period and religion, to individual temperament.
They prove how limited gendered speech models can be, while simultaneously supporting Mills' belief that; 'gender is a variable affecting both our language competence and..expectations about language use."
Limiting the examination of gender to how it is manifested by either discourse or silence alone is reductive in my opinion, due to the existence of so many varied methods of gender expression that challenge the implications generated by how it is rendered through language.
Like Dickinson's quotation and gender itself, the texts demand continual questioning as each depiction and insinuation remains open to perpetual interrogation, part of the appeal and frustration inherent in each text.
The two passages that this essay shall discuss are very similar in terms of character, theme and narrator/speaker intention and they share some stylistic devices too.
The two characters, Quoyle and Estha, from 4 a) and 4b) respectively, are presented indirectly through narrative description, instead of direct speech, act, or thought representation.
Their joint theme seems to be that the narrator, whoever s/he is, tries to, using varying facts, forms of description and conjecture, account for, or understand the character in question.
The main aim of this essay will be to discern and analyse the function of the writers' different techniques that contribute to the narrator-character-reader dynamic.
One of the first things to notice is that whilst 4 b) is simply prose, 4 b) is a shorter piece of prose, with a picture, a dictionary-style definition of 'Quoyle' and the title 'Quoyle' in bold.
Before discussing the latter generic and graphological deviations, we will discuss something that the length of the pieces drew attention to.
Their differences in length lead to doing a word count: 4 b) has 203 words and 4 a) had 165, which in itself is unremarkable.
However, the one hundredth and thirty-sixth word of 4 a) is "thirty-six", which may, or may not be intentional.
Either way, it is salient, albeit hidden point, in terms of ways of 'entering' the text.
This is because it links up with the idea of chance and randomness in the text, which are signified by such words/phrases as "shuffle" and "counting on nothing" with their gambling connotations.
It also links up to the fact that one can enter the text, or indeed enter the life of the character, Quoyle, at any level - as symbolised by the picture of the rope with one end tailing off: anybody can pick it up at any point, beginning, middle or end.
Each narrator, as mentioned before, seems to be trying to comprehend his/her text's character.
However, their approaches, and point-of-view are entirely different.
4 a)'s narrator appears closer to his character than that of 4 b) because he uses deictic expressions like "here is an account" and has intimate knowledge of Quoyle's physical and mental internal workings: Although the use of mundane facts, declarative statements and factive verbs  seem factual and reliable, the narrator him/herself points out that it is only one account of Quoyle's life by the use of the indefinite article "an", so is not a definitive account.
On the other hand is the narrator of 4 b), who, by virtue of the character's silence, has trouble finding any starting points, or any facts to base his judgements on.
Indeed, he exclaims that "The fact is that there wasn't an 'exactly when'", which is the first of many examples throughout the text in which the narrator explains Estha not in terms of what he is, but what he is not.
Furthermore, the more the narrator tries to comprehend Estha's silence, the more he must re-phrase himself and use more words: he goes on The fact that s/he uses six short sentences to repeat the general idea that 'Estha is quiet', portrays the narrator as clearly grappling with this concept.
It also sounds like spoken language because, as Stott and Chapman say in Grammar and Writing , "One sentence appears to seep into another and we repeat ourselves in speech much more often than we do in writing."
The contrast between the narrator's search for more words and her/his description of Estha's diminishing speech highlights how important speech is for this narrator.
He defines Estha's existence by how much 'noise' he makes; he could describe his appearance, his likes/dislikes or any other attribute, but thinks that "Estha occupied very little space in the world" just because he never speaks.
Compared to 4 b), this is a very limited description.
4 b)'s narrator tries to describe Quoyle from every conceivable angle: he explores the alternative meanings of his name, draws a picture, says where he was born/where his ancestors are from and discusses his stomach problems, food tastes and jobs.
So rather than a descriptive account of what the character doesn't say, he gives a factual account of his actions, tastes, whereabouts and so on.
Despite these differences, it could be argued that the narrators in both texts are similar because, just like Estha is an enigma to 4 b)'s narrator, Quoyle is like a knot that 4 a)'s narrator is trying to untie, hence the definition of Quoyle from the "ASHLEY BOOK OF KNOTS": One way of interpreting this is that whoever created the knot symbolises the people who have shaped Quoyle's life.
The fact that the coil was designed "so that it may be walked on if necessary" matches the bullying Quoyle appears to have experienced: "he survived childhood ...[and] camouflaged torment with smiles and silence" - people really have walked all over him.
4 a) and 4 b) both use camouflage imagery to describe how the characters deal with their situation.
Just as Quoyle "camouflaged torment" , Estha The silence and chameleon-like behaviour that both characters taught themselves "Over time", is like the Chameleon's natural defence mechanism against their predators.
The use of the word "untrained" above, with its negative prefix, and the later reference to "strangers", suggests that there is somebody else, perhaps the narrator, who has trained their eyes to see him.
This would suggest that the narrator is closer to Estha than previously thought, and that although s/he doesn't describe his internal/external states, they do share some intimacy.
There is much word play, and striking graphological deviation on the name Quoyle in 4 a).
Firstly, it is phonetically identical to the word 'coil', which suggests the text may have a cyclical nature.
This is, in fact, true, as it opens with where Quoyle was born and ends with him returning the birthplace of his ancestors.
Secondly, the text provides alternative names for 'Quoyle': 'Quoyle', 'Flemish flake', 'coil' and 'knot' all denote the same object.
This links into the overall theme that there is no fixed definition of, or starting point to understanding Quoyle's life.
Thirdly and a little tenuously, the picture of the coil of rope looks like a backwards 'Q', which would be a further visual representation of the Quoyle's name.
The statement could either refer to the following written account of his life, or to the afore mentioned rope/backwards 'Q' situated just above the statement.
This is reinforced by the fact that the sentence stands alone as a paragraph, separate from the rest of the text.
To stretch the interpretation of the coil even further, one could view the surrounding blank space, which is a graphological feature precisely because it takes up so much of the page's layout, as symbolic of Quoyle's loneliness and the feeling of drifting.
This sense of loneliness and 'drifting' is expressed by nautical imagery, such as "on deck" and "steered away" which create the sense that Quoyle is like a drifting ship on a voyage of self-exploration.
The texts are temporally similar: they are both written  in the past tense, and the time elapsed in the fictional world is skimmed over similarly in both texts.
In 4 b), the writer often uses the construction 'had + main verb' to create the past tense, for example, "Estha had always been a quiet child", "he had stopped talking", "It had been a gradual winding down", "Over time he had acquired" and so on.
The auxiliary 'had' creates the continuous past tense, which contributes to the sense that Estha's "winding down" took a long time, and was not a sudden, noticeable 'event'.
This gradual, protracted process adds to the sense of the narrator's difficulty locating exact time frames when the character doesn't speak.
This raises the question, 'does lack of speech render Estha non-existent'?
It certainly does to the "strangers" who took "a while to notice him even when they are in the same room as him" or "never noticed at all."
Like 4 b) cannot even differentiate "the year, if not the month or day" without speech as a guideline, 4 a)'s timeline speeds up/slows down according to Quoyle's mental state.
He speeds through Quoyle's life until his thirties - and suddenly, when Quoyle feels "bereft, brimming with grief and thwarted love", we have the exact age, thirty-six.
The fact that the time specificity coincides with Quoyle's "grief and thwarted love", when he used to "separate his feelings from his life", clearly shows the subjectivity of peoples' perception of time.
The return of feeling and decision to return to his homeland, Newfoundland, are patently key moments in Quoyle's life, hence the time scale zooms-in to an exact year.
The syntactical and lexical choices the writers have made reinforce many of the effects discussed so far.
For example in 4 a), the lack of the personal pronoun 'he' in "Stumbled through his twenties..." foregrounds the haphazard, accidental way Quoyle seems to have fell into his twenties.
The bright, clear-sounding phonaestheme 'st' in "stumbled" and the short low-vowel sound / / also contribute to this effect.
There is an interesting interplay between simple sentences and long, heavily subordinated sentences in both texts.
For instance in 4 a), the contrast between and enhances the fact that Quoyle knows what food he likes; that's simple.
The meandering of the second complex sentence feels much more tentative, which is appropriate to the more sensitive subject matter.
In 4 b) there are three main large, complex sentences that are surrounded by shorter, single clause sentences such as these three, and the final sentence, They are foregrounded because of the contrast in length, which gives a note of pathos to the narrative, and points to the futility of the narrator repeating her/himself, or using complicated allegories like "the psychological equivalent of what lungfish do to get themselves through the dry season", when a simple sentence will do.
The complex sentences also seem less factive because they are more highly modified: "no one could pinpoint with any degree of accuracy exactly when..." This uncertainty is augmented by the use of cognition verbs such as "notice" and the comparative "As though" used to aid the narrator's thought.
This essay has started to explore the infinite number of ways to read the texts.
The self-aware style of 4 a)'s narrator, who disclaims "Here is an account", reflects how limited his view is, and how any reader's interpretation is never conclusive.
The style of 4 b) is less self-assured and critically aware; instead, it is like we are listening to the vocalisation of the narrator's puzzlement over Estha's taciturnity.
Despite this, we do trust 4 b)'s narrator's judgement, because of his implicit emotional deictic proximity to Estha, as discussed earlier.
The essay has examined how both writers engineer time scales to suit the narrative subject and tone, which is just one form of the utter subjectivity of narrative/character/reader perceptions.
Thus 4 a), by providing multi-layered access to the text and Quoyle's life, and 4 b) by openly showing the narrator's flaws and thought processes, express the living, changing and fallible nature of character representation in prose.
Aphra Behn begins this poem by relating the narrator's passion to a stream, through the use of metaphorical language.
The second line creates an image of a fork in the stream as it splits into different, but equal courses.
This appropriately summarises the theme of the poem; the narrator has to decide on a course to take, meaning she has to choose either Damon or Alexis.
In terms of rhyme scheme, the first and third stanzas consist of three rhyming couplets .
This type of rhyme scheme is sometimes referred to as 'metrically accelerated rhyme' - the rhyme words are as close together as possible, speeding up the pace of the poem.
The fast pace suggests a rapid stream of thought as the narrator, or persona, tries to make sense of her complex situation.
The rhyme scheme changes to ababcc in the second stanza, and consequently there is a break from rhyming couplets.
This highlights the unexpected sound of 'mourn' at the end of the second line.
The idea of mourning is central to the poem, as it helps relate a sense of longing and sadness.
There is a fairly equal balance of perfect and imperfect rhyme throughout the poem, although most of the imperfect rhyme occurs in the last stanza .
These are examples of pararhyme; the vowel sounds differ, but the consonants remain the same .
Typically half or imperfect rhyme creates a disconcerting feel, and this is true for the last stanza.
The increasing sense of tension and frustration is reinforced further by the question mark at the end of the fourth line.
This is apt for the subject of the poem, as there is no satisfying conclusion.
The narrator cannot choose between her two lovers, so the poem ends on a hopeless and resigned note.
Despite the full rhyme in the final lines of the poem , the words simply reinforce each other and heighten the sense of loss and disillusionment.
'Crost' is a form of 'crossed', and in the phrase "all my hopes are crost" it probably meant 'obliterated'.
Another instance of full rhyme that is more disturbing than agreeable is 'heart / part' in the first stanza.
Although the words are acoustically similar, they clash in terms of meaning.
In this context the pairing of 'heart' and 'part' suggests something that should be complete, but is in fact separated.
This could be referred to as 'counter-semantic' rhyme, because the connotations of 'part' question those of 'heart'.
Generally the poem is written in iambic tetrameter, with the last line of each stanza in iambic pentameter.
Usually the second syllable of each line is emphasised, but there are some exceptions, such as the first line of the third stanza.
In this case the first syllable 'cure' is stressed.
This is a particularly significant point in the poem as it marks a change in tone.
The third stanza begins commanding Cupid to take action.
It signals a break from the more reflective nature of the preceding stanzas and offers the reader some sort of conclusion.
Gothic romance fiction pivots around a central female character.
Many classical Hollywood films turned to the Gothic to tell woman's stories.
I intend to explore why the Gothic is seen as a genre for women and privileges their experiences.
Offers a general study of the genre.
Explains the Gothic's importance due to the cultural anxieties it evokes through characters, location and plot.
Introduces feminist criticism to portray Gothic writing as a female experience.
Claims the heroines' reactions are the centre of the narrative.
Discusses the "uncanny" and the homely terrors in the Gothic.
Explains the rise of Gothic fiction through its socio-historical context.
Studies the work of the main Gothic female writers.
States the most thrusting and assertive female writers were the Gothic novelists.
Stresses the importance of passion and extreme feelings in the Gothic which are presented through its extraordinary plots.
Claims women are oppressed in 1940s films.
Argues the effort to introduce female subjectivity clashes with narrative forms.
Asserts Gothic films take female subjectivity to its limit and studies the importance of the female gaze.
Identifies female paranoia in Gothic films and illustrates these arguments with case studies of Caught and Rebecca.
Discusses a feminist criticism of the Gothic.
Debates the role of women in the genre, displaying a wide variety of interpretations and arguments.
States feminists do not agree if Gothic heroines are submissive or not and if this model is promoted to readers.
The Gothic is a genre which reflects and develops women's fantasies.
Defines the Gothic film genre through the classic horror period, the female Gothic and the adaptations of Poe.
The Gothic heroine has a double function as she suffers and investigates a mystery prompted by sexual anxieties.
Introduces the concept of the "frigid heroine" whose reaction to the threat of sexuality is to be scared of sex.
Relates the Gothic with film noir and melodrama.
Indicates similarities with film noir based on attraction between characters, the emotional importance of the protagonist and the suspicious settings of stories.
Melodramas offer a genre for the female point of view and focus on the dramatic, emotional and psychological aspects of stories.
Offers a commentary and analysis of the nature of the Modern gothic.
Runs through each of the essential elements that constitute a Gothic story and how they contribute to its style.
Argues Modern Gothics are adventure stories with passive protagonists as the heroines never take an active part in resolving the mysteries that surround them.
Argues the need to redefine the term 'Female Gothic' as Moer's original definition of 'Female Gothic'  has become too vague.
Studies the current situation in criticism of Female Gothic and suggests Female Gothic may be considered a separate literary genre.
Explains the 1940s signified a transition for women and the Gothic romance emerged from here.
Indicates women were a large part of the audience so studios wanted a genre for them.
The Gothic offers a means of expression of feminine reject to patriarchy and favours woman's perception.
Insists the central character is a woman and it is her experience spectators encounter.
Studies the film Rebecca in a Gothic frame.
Explores the containment of the character Rebecca and women's perspective.
States the film banishes woman's perspective at the end.
Highlights the emotional dependence of male on heroine.
Implies the film may be a "man's film after all".
Modernism as a movement came about as a reaction to the 'inescapable forces of turbulent social modernization."
The race for empire, World War I, the Suffrage movement, and conflict in Ireland, as well as popular concerns over novel ways of thinking: nihilism, relativism, fakery- all gave rise to a desire for radical breaks with tradition in favour of new beginnings; a desire that 'penetrated the interior of artistic invention."
It is a movement characterized by an 'emphasis on verbal texture,' and by 'clusters of images, metaphors and symbols."
One of the ways the aesthetics of Modernism were displayed was through the 'disintegration of coherent narratives and settings into startling and apparently unrelated images."
The critic R. Emig states that 'poetry...is a paradigm, a model of the pattern, of Modernism;' therefore in order to explore the Modernist's 'attention to "form" as opposed to "content"' and illustrate the move away from a traditional narrative form I will discuss the work of the Imagist Poets.
Similarly, James Joyce 'radically departed from the formula-oriented modes and devices of the plotted story' in his collection of short stories, entitled Dubliners, another text I will examine.
It is worth comparing some works of the Imagist Poets to those in the Lyrical Ballads by William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge, in order to see clearly the rejection of 'both explicit and identifiable speakers and narratives' in the latter.
Both F. S. Flint's 'Beggar' and Wordsworth's 'The Female Vagrant' deal with the issue of poverty; however, Wordsworth goes to great lengths describing to the reader the 'artless story' of the vagrant.
The poem begins with the beginning of her tale: The reader is presented with the story as a narrative, encompassing the entirety of the vagrant's experience of poverty.
The vagrant is speaking directly to the narrator, giving a heightened sense of reality to her tale.
In contrast, Flint's poem presents the Beggar 'in the gutter' as he would be seen by a passer-by.
The opinions of the beggar himself are of no interest to the poet; instead he is focused on the image of the beggar in itself.
Therefore, although their subject matter is similar, the aims of the two poets are different.
Whilst Wordsworth's verses can be read as a social commentary, intended to inspire pity in the reader, Flint is striving to present what Ezra Pound called the 'intellectual and emotional complex in an instant of time."
Pound stated that an Imagist poet 'seeks out the luminous detail.
He does not comment."
Thus we, as readers, are given no background and are instead presented with a myriad of impressions: 'huddled and mean,' 'winds beat him,' 'wind from an empty belly.'
This layering of images characterises the poetry of the Modernists which is typically 'made of details' but devoid of a narrative.
Flint's poem showcases the 'depersonalizing [of] the poetic voice;' what we are given instead is a picture made almost photographic by an overabundance of details and adjectives: 'shrivelled,' 'draggled,' 'forlorn."
By presenting an image in such a manner Flint is demonstrating one of the three 'rules' of the Imagist school: 'direct treatment of the "thing," whether subjective or objective."
The lack of a narrative serves to negate what impact the opinions of a conventional narrator may otherwise have had, and thus allows the reader to be much more sensitized to the mood, rather than the moral message, of the piece.
The story 'Counterparts,' in Joyce's Dubliners, is similarly lacking in a moral message.
In it, Joyce 'tacitly acknowledges the undercurrents of anger, frustration & helplessness that pervade Irish life."
The story clearly showcases the dangers of a life stifled by oppression: Farrington is trapped in a job he dislikes and is treated badly by his boss.
He does not act on the 'spasm of rage' that he feels towards Mr Alleyne; instead he cruelly beats his young son on returning home.
The cries of the 'little boy' inspire great pathos: However, like Flint in The Beggar, Joyce is not condemning Farrington's actions.
Joyce praised Ibsen for presenting 'average lives in their uncompromising truth,' and in this story he is doing just that.
Joyce 'held up a mirror to the average Irishman' in what he termed his 'nicely polished looking glass."
In this story and throughout Dubliners Joyce is highlighting the effects of 'moral paralysis or hemiplegia of the will,' something he put down to 'the experience of modern urban life."
Like the Imagist poets, Joyce moved away from a traditional narrative form to convey this message, instead recognising 'the complexity of language as the fundamental medium of culture in its historical, creative and unconscious dimensions.'
Joyce's focus on language is skilfully paired with 'a detailed, closely observed depiction of the surfaces of life."
As such he adopts a 'naturalistic' approach.
Humans are imprisoned in the social and physical; therefore Joyce places less emphasis on a heavily plotted narrative, and the intensity of his stories comes instead from his ability to precisely capture a mood.
In 'Eveline' the entirety of the story is presented as a stream of consciousness.
Up to the last section there is an air of pensive musing to the tale, as Eveline sits at the window weighing up her decision: This meditative air is paired with many small details, which add a sense of reality to the story and make it more vivid: By using language in this manner Joyce is able to capture a precise mood, and although we are given little detail about the life of Eveline herself, by adjusting the style of the story to the experience of the main protagonist, Joyce is able to bring her character alive.
Eveline is vague about Buenos Aires, where she is proposing to spend the rest of her life.
As readers we can assume that this is due to the fact that she has never previously left Dublin.
It is perhaps for this reason that although Eveline feels that 'she must escape' and that 'Frank would save her,' when it comes to it she finds herself in 'a maze of distress:' We can emphasise completely with Eveline's distress in this story.
Despite there being little by way of an 'exciting suspenseful narrative,' the development of her character shows a very human complexity to her wants and desires, a paradoxical nature to her feelings which the readers can easily relate to.
Joyce uses a similar technique to develop a character in 'The Sisters,' the first story in the collection.
It is written from the point of view of a young boy, and Joyce is careful, therefore, to keep the language and opinions of the piece consistent with his protagonist.
For that reason he changed the following passage which was originally written in a comparatively adult cadence: The sentence was replaced with the much more straightforward and child-like: This retains the meaning of the original, yet by simplifying the language and extending the sentence length, Joyce ensures that it is much more in keeping with a younger narrator.
Very little action takes place in this story; it is instead the complexity and authenticity of the characterization that maintains the reader's interest.
Joyce immediately sets the tone of the piece with the opening lines.
The story opens with a negative: 'There was no hope for him this time,' and throughout the first paragraph the gloomy atmosphere is intensified by his use of language: 'dead,' 'corpse,' 'paralysis."
Much of the story takes place at night or at twilight, and throughout is permeated with the powerful image of the 'old priest...lying still in his coffin."
The tale ends abruptly, with a startling image: that of the priest in his confession box, 'wide-awake and laughing-like to himself."
The unexpected nature of this image could be explained by the Modernist 'resolve to startle and disturb the public."
In any case, it ensures that the figure of the priest is a vivid one, showing that '[Joyce's] most powerful characters are often those who are barely seen."
By creating such a powerful image Joyce is able to ensure, with out the use of a lengthy narrative, that a character who does not speak once throughout the piece is one who will leave a lasting impression on the reader.
This stress on what was termed the 'doctrine of the image' can also be seen in Richard Aldington's poem, Images.
In it, the theme of love is explored in six stanzas, each presenting the reader with striking imagery, made more compelling by the use of both simile and metaphor: 'The blue smoke leaps/ Like swirling clouds of birds vanishing.'
'A rose yellow moon in a pale sky."
The style is succinct and direct; language, such as this, 'checked by the application of sculptural analysis,' has the effect of creating a poetic method that is fragmented and yet unified in its presentation of Aldington's 'desires."
By using strong imagery in this fashion, Aldington creates a poem that is full of what may be termed 'static beauty.'
However despite the clarity and precision of the image, Aldington's poem displays little real emotion or psychology.
The character of his love is not revealed to us, nor is the progress of the relationship.
This shows the Imagist school's break away from conventional lyric poetry which evolved out of the ballad form, and therefore maintained strong narrative traditions.
By 'cutting, arresting, limiting, permitting no flow' in the language used, the Imagists were able to concentrate on capturing a precise mood in their poetry.
A similar focus on mood is seen in John Gould Fletcher's The Skaters.
The entire poem is an extended metaphor based on a single image- that of ice-skaters as they 'skim over the frozen river."
Fletcher compares the skaters to 'black swallows,' and at the end of the poem describes the sound of their skating to 'the brushing together of thin wing-tips of silver."
By beginning and ending with images of flight, Fletcher is surrounding the central image, that of the skaters, with the metaphor.
By doing so, the poet is lending these brief lines a sense of neatness and completeness.
It is this aspect of Imagist poetry that is described by M. Levenson when he states that 'every element of the work is an instrument of its effect."
The brevity of the verse results in a necessary precision in the language; there is no room for superfluous details in this poem.
If one is to maintain this sense of crispness to the text, 'language is no longer freely available for mere ornamental descriptions of reality,' and lengthy narrative styles become obsolete.
The poet H.D., one of the founders of the Imagist school along with Ezra Pound and Richard Aldington, was particularly noted for her sharp, direct style of poetry.
She strove to think exclusively through images, and in her verses she presented 'no detail not germane to such thinking, no detail obligated merely by pictorial completeness."
In this sense, her poem entitled 'Evening' is redolent of T. S. Eliot's 'heap of broken images."
In H. D.'s description of a garden at sunset there is a distinct feel of fragmentation and obtuseness about the verses, which at times seems almost wilfully obscure: The poem is written in vers libre: there is no ostensibly fixed rhyme scheme or rhythm.
Therefore the line breaks, not determined by form, take on 'an integrity and function of [their] own."
H.D.
does not capitalize the beginning of each line, and makes little use of punctuation throughout the poem.
Eliot called this rejection of any formulaic poetic structure the 'unperceived evasion of monotony."
Changes in religious and scientific thinking, which had resulted from the works of Darwin in the nineteenth century, had placed a new emphasis on man as an individual rather than as part of the prevalent religious and social ideals of his time.
'Within an intellectual framework based on human autonomy, originality becomes the benchmark of human quality;' H. D is not conforming to what Modernists saw as the empty musicality of Victorian literature, the 'horrible agglomerate compost...a doughy mess of third-hand Keats, Wordsworth...fourth-hand Elizabethan sonority."
She is instead asserting her 'claim to aesthetic dignity' by rejecting a style which 'had sold itself to a mass reading public."
In common with the poems previously discussed, these are verses 'liberated from metaphysical and religious master-plans,' and as such are free to create and capture a mood rather than to tell a story.
It is clear, then, that the Imagist poets desired a complete break with tradition and, in doing so, strove to focus on capturing an exact image rather than telling interesting stories.
They, like many involved with the Modernist movement, were 'reaffirming and fortifying the boundaries between art and mass culture;' a mass culture they 'construed as a threat of encroaching formlessness."
As a Modernist writer, James Joyce was concerned with similar aesthetic ideals: those of focus not on content but on method, of brevity and accuracy in prose, of 'directness, verbal economy, and musicality."
However, unlike the Imagist poems, Joyce's Dubliners does contain elements of an 'underlying theme or argument' that unfolds like a thread throughout the stories.
It is for this reason that the critic Hugh Kenner argues that Dubliners is 'less a sequence of stories than a kind of multi-faceted novel."
It is the theme of paralysis, introduced in the first of the stories and returned to in each, that serves as a 'unifying concern' throughout Dubliners.
The main protagonists in each tale are 'trapped in limited domestic situations;' again and again escape is offered, only to be turned down.
This can be seen, for example, in 'A Painful Case,' in which Mr James Duffey is offered the chance of companionship to relieve his futile and lonely existence.
It is not until he hears of Mrs Sinico's death that he becomes fully aware of the misplaced 'rectitude of his life.'
Joyce repeats the latter phrase, stressing how Duffey has 'withheld life;' in Dubliners it was 'Joyce's intention to expose the spiritual decay of his countrymen and to caricature their afflicted souls."
Therefore the motif of entrapment and paralysis is central to each story.
The changes to contemporary aesthetic ideals at the beginning of the nineteenth century can be interpreted as a 'late endeavour to come to terms with the rifts that were thrown open by modernity."
Great social, economic and political turmoil caused writers to loose faith in the artistic conventions of the immediate past, and to look instead to the Greco-Roman period for inspiration.
They 'disavowed their Romantic inheritance in order to assert their roots in an earlier tradition trumpeted as "classicism."'
This 'Modernist contempt for popular culture' created a literary upheaval; one that dramatically changed the shape of the narrative form.
The Imagist poets abandoned the idea of telling interesting stories in their poetry, instead adopting what Ezra Pound called 'laconic speech."
It is this speech: 'objective - no slither - direct...straight as the Greek' - which allows the poets to capture so skilfully an exact mood or to present so faithful an image.
In Dubliners Joyce adopts a similar 'generalization of unexpected exactness."
His 'almost obsessive demand for accuracy,' and insistence that 'only the accurate fact ensured the meaning,' resulted in a style that moved away from traditional narratives packed with action and event, and towards presenting 'a single individual in the infinite labyrinth of his little life.'
By not presenting the reader with a narrative, Joyce does not take his characters through several stages of development.
He is free instead to concentrate on developing and capturing the complexity of the characters that we find in every story, presented as they are in a moment in time.
John Dryden argued that poetry written in blank verse was in fact not poetry: 'poetry needed rhyme like the state needed a king."
In this essay I will look at two poems concerned with a similar subject matter, one engaged in the 'bondage' of a regular rhyme scheme and the other in the 'ancient liberty' of free verse.
The first of these is B. Jonson's 'On My First Son.'
In this poem, the grief of a father who's lost his son is strictly contained within the limits of a regular rhyme scheme.
This 'order, regularity, skill, and art' is characteristic of the poetry of the time.
Jonson's use of heroic couplets enables him to present each pair of lines as a self contained syntactic unit.
This has the effect of maintaining the momentum of the poem.
For the most part, the poem is written in iambic pentameter, which is the 'most popular metrical line' in English poetry.
However Jonson makes a brief break from this in line three: The first two feet in this line are anapaestic.
The addition of two extra syllables in this line slightly alters the beat of the poem, maintaining the interest of the reader.
It also has the effect of suggesting Jonson's difficulty at presenting his grief within such a tight metrical scheme.
Jonson makes use of caesura throughout the poem, with lines like: By fracturing the lines in this manner within the regular iambic pentameter of the poem, Jonson is clearly showing the distress he feels at loosing his eldest son.
He also uses enjambment in this extract, flowing the lines into each other in order to maintain the pace of the poem.
He is extending the sentence concerned with the thought that he should be pleased for his son rather than 'lamenting' his death, showing that while he can reason with himself, his emotions are beyond rational control.
There is little figurative language in this poem.
However, Jonson uses the metaphor of his son being 'lent' to him, and his having to 'pay' for this loan on his son's seventh birthday.
He uses another metaphor towards the end of the poem, suggesting that his son was his 'best piece of poetry.'
Jonson uses sibilance with 'best piece,' and coupled with the meaning of the metaphor, this helps to make the language both ornamental and fundamental to the meaning of the poem.
The second poem is J. O'Callaghan's 'Pleeeeeeeeease.'
Unlike Jonson's poem, this is written in the style of free verse.
The breaks in this poem are determined 'entirely by syntax and sense."
O'Callaghan makes consistent use of enjambment throughout the poem, with the only punctuation coming in the form of a question mark to end the poem.
Like Jonson, O'Callaghan's poem is addressed to someone who has died, and by ending the poem with a question O'Callaghan leaves the meaning of the poem hanging in the air, emphasising that it can never be answered.
The poem is both aural and visual in its structure; although the line length is mixed, when it is laid out on the page you can see how the lines are shortest at the beginning and end of the poem and longest towards the middle.
This has the effect of showing the speaker getting lost in reminiscence as she gets into the poem.
The lines are stichic, which stresses the flow of consciousness that is suggested by the lack of punctuation and use of enjambment.
However, there is a strong relation between lineation and syntax, with each line presenting a separate thought about an action.
This maintains the integrity of the structure of the poem, and makes it easier to read.
O'Callaghan uses alliteration in line 6 with 'blab,' and 'boats and bikes.'
As this is the only instance of alliteration in the poem, it stands out, and serves to endear the reader to the subject of this poem's irritating habits.
In turn, this seems to stress the special nature of the relationship between the speaker and the subject of the poem.
The most significant structural device in this poem is O'Callaghan's use of anaphora, beginning each line with 'and.'
This has the same effect on the poem as Jonson's strict metrical scheme: by imposing a structure onto her thoughts, O'Callaghan is preventing the poem from becoming overcome with grief.
This is also an example of the 'contrast between fixity and flux."
In contrasting the openness of the rhythm and line length with a fixed opening to every line, O'Callaghan is showing that her poem is not 'free' but is in fact controlled.
'The line on the page has an integrity and function of its own.'
O'Callaghan stresses that the poem is addressed to someone she knew well with the use of colloquial language, such as 'kooky' in line 16 and by writing 'OK' in the informal style in line 19.
She also refers to the 'Prairie Home Companion' without explanation.
This seems to make the poem feel more intimate.
The repetition of the words 'I,' 'you,' and most significantly, 'we,' has the same effect.
She also uses parallelism, by repeating the line As this line comes towards the beginning of the poem and then again towards the end, the repetition serves to bring the poem to a close.
Although these two poems are written in very different styles, in both cases it is the formal features of their structure which help to control their powerful content.
By presenting the painful issue of death in this measured and restrained manner, it is made all the more painful and touching to the reader, rather than if it was just presented in an uncontrolled outpouring of grief.
Underlines the connection between industrialism and novels during the Victorian Age.
Argues that literature gave the middle-classes access to the conditions of the working-classes, novels presented the contrasts between social classes.
Reading about the factory was easier than actually experiencing it.
Asserts that Dickens is a novelist of the city and Hard Time belongs to the industrial novel genre.
The novel offers comments on the political unrest linked to industrialization.
Industrial culture reached into the lives of the novel's characters and threatens to turn society into a kind of factory.
Presents some characteristics emerging from the industrialization of Victorian England and their influence on literature.
States that industrial novels depict working-class life.
Argues that strikes became the dramatic centre of most industrial novels whose plots usually turned to members of the middle-classes forming affective relations with individual workers.
The idea was to control potential revolutions.
Asserts that if many Victorian writers complied with the technological wonders of their time, some artists, such as the Pre-Raphaelites, decided to turn away from the factory.
Stresses that Dickens was the first writer to put the city into his fiction and to focus on urban life.
At his time, London was subjected to many changes due to the Industrial Revolution.
States that Dickens described this emerging urban world and that the capital became a determining element in the plots of his novels.
The novelist also used the city as a reflection of his characters' personalities.
Argues that Dickens' technique to describe the city gives his work an illusion of motion.
Stresses that if London and the city played important roles in Dickens' own life, they are also at the centre of his creative imagination.
Explores the writer's approach to the city and examines how it evolved throughout his literary career.
In novels, such as Oliver Twist or David Copperfield, London is portrayed as a dark labyrinth, a place of terror in which individuals remain anonymous and struggle for survival.
In other novels, such as Martin Chuzzlewit or Bleak House, the capital is described as a model of social organization -the novelist drew analogies between buildings and society.
Presents Dickens' portrayal of the city both as a historical reality and as a metaphor.
Shows that the writer was aware of the problems - being economic, social or political - which were at the centre of the Victorian city and explains how he integrated them into his work.
Dickens associated the city with death and hell but also greed, money and selfishness.
"Good" characters can also dwell in the city but they are earnest, charitable and they forgive their enemies.
Also examines how the writer treated the Victorian ideal of hearth and home and incorporated into his work by connecting it to the city.
Focuses on Dickens' depiction of London in Oliver Twist.
Analyses the role that the city plays in Oliver and the other characters' lives.
Shows that the Dodger and Fagin are connected to the city: the former grew faster than an ordinary child due to the fast-paced life of London while the latter is physically associated with the city because he is portrayed as the mirror image of his dark and dirty den.
States that even if Oliver gets connected to Fagin and his nefarious surroundings, it does not damage his identity and the hero still prospers.
Argues that Dickens' Hard Time is a realistic representation of the conditions in industrial societies and the novel allowed the writer to criticize industrial capitalism.
Demonstrates that Dickens' depiction of the factory metaphorically represents the destructive forces at work in the characters' lives.
The main protagonists, Stephen and Louisa are both defined by the factory: they are often connected with images of smoke or fire and they are metonymically presented as the fuel and eventually waste of the factory.
Stephen is presented as fuel for the system of production while Louisa is fuel for marriage and reproduction.
Explores the characteristics of Dickens' style and stresses his linguistic creativity.
Focuses on the writer's grammar: underlines his tendency to reclassify countable nouns into uncountable or vice versa, his alternations between indirect speech and free indirect speech and his use of collective nouns or "string-compound".
Presents Dickens as a lexical innovator: many words which have now entered English language were first coined in his novels.
Stresses the writer's style to turn nouns into verbs or vice versa and reviews numerous terms created by the novelist.
States that Dickens' contribution to language history should be better recognized.
Underlines the unique scope of Dickens' repertoire.
His characters' linguistic behaviours often deviate from the norm which allowed the writer to present linguistic oddities.
Points out idiosyncratic pronunciations and the writer's skill to play with the sound of words.
Stresses Dickens' treatment of strings of words.
Focuses on the putting together of prestige terms with colloquial or slangy words.
States that the novelist offered his readers extensive but realistic and convincing specimens of substandard English.
Finally asserts that Dickens -commented his own style in his work through some remarks of his characters.
Stresses the unprecedented style of Dickens' prose.
Argues that the writer transformed and reshaped language.
Presents examples of "grammatical mimesis" - passages where external descriptions are filtered through the consciousness of a character.
Shows how the writer managed to blur the boundaries between people and things.
He resorted to metaphors to bestow animation on objects.
Points out the Dickensian approach to double meanings, to play with the literal and the metaphorical senses of a same word.
Highlights his skill to create "syllepsis"-to join together unlike things- and his fondness for adjectival triads, the use of three successive adjectives.
d
Robinson Crusoe by Daniel Defoe was published in 1719 and is sometimes regarded as the first novel in English.
However, as Kristeva poited out in 1960's when she coined the word 'intertextuality', "any text is the absorption and transformation of another".
Daniel Defoe was inspired by the life of Alexander Selkirk who remained a castaway for almost thirty years after being marooned on a remote island.
It follows that Defoe's novel is not the beginning of the 'Crusoe adventure' and it is certaily not the end.
A great number of writers were inspired by the eighteenth-century novelist such as J. M. Coetzee with Foe  or Diana Souhami with Selkirk's Island .
Many writers have 're-written' Robinson Crusoe and it is also the aim of the following piece of work.
The idea is to produce a short text which 're-visits' the myth of Crusoe.
The composition is completed by a commentary which explains how ideas for my re-writing came and evolved, how I made choices and which strategies I resorted to.
The commentary then focuses on important issues brought up by the composition and finally reviews other possibilities that could have been explored.
The initial seed of my rewriting came from the very title of the assignment's case study: 'Revisiting Crusoe's Island'.
The term 'revisiting' implied going back to the island.
In the edition of Robinson Crusoe which is divided into chapters, the last chapter is entitled "I Revisit My Island".
At the end of the novel, Defoe's hero briefly returns to his island.
As a consequence, I thought that Crusoe could not be used as the 'revisitor' since it would have been his re-revisit.
It was the island which had to be revisited - visited by someone else.
At that point, I came to the idea that a new protagonist could come to the island several years after Crusoe's took his leave and found what is left of the "eight and twenty Years, two Months, and 19 Days" that Crusoe spent in his own "Country", his "own meer Property".
This new 'visitor' would not be acquainted with the existence of Crusoe, so that the re-writing could focus on suppositions and hypotheses.
He would be confronted to the signs of Robinson's stay and would have to speculate about their meaning.
I had now to find who this "visitor" could be.
I first thought of 'creating' him.
The action had to take place in the 1720's or 1730's, it means around forty years after Crusoe's departure.
It could hardly be after since Robinson Crusoe's 'traces', his habitations, his constructions, his "home-made" objects had to be in a reasonably good state to be recognizable and worth wondering about.
The 'visitor' had to stop on the island, it could be for diverse reasons: collecting victuals for his ship, a colonial expedition or a naturalist exploration such as Darwin's in the Galapagos.
However, the project evolved differently.
It occurred to me that instead of 'creating' a character, I could borrow one from another novel, one whose story gave the opportunity to visit an island.
The idea of my project was now to blend and fuse two novels.
The status of my re-writing would be a kind of intertextual hybrid.
I would "recast two  related texts in a new textual mould".
However, I would only produce a mixture; I would remould my chosen novel in order to introduce allusions to Robinson Crusoe.
Two titles came into my mind: Swift's Gulliver Travels  and Stevenson's Treasure Island .
I had now to make a choice.
Swift's hero bears several similarities with Defoe's.
Gulliver's ship is caught in a storm and although the hero's companions die, he manages to survive and reaches an island, the country of the Lilliputs.
Later in the novel, Gulliver is marooned by the sailors of his ship who turned up to be pirates.
It is reminiscent of Diana Souhami's "original Robinson Crusoe", Selkirk, who was marooned on a remote island.
Concerning time, the two novels work very well since Gulliver's last travel, in the country of the Houyhnhnms takes place in 1715.
Consequently, Gulliver's "Voyage to the island of Robinson Crusoe" could happen set just after, in 1716, which means thirty three years after Crusoe's departure.
However, in terms of genre, the two novels are quite different.
As some critics pointed out, Defoe's work gives an illusion of reality.
Leslie Stephen argued that the novel was "in one sense marvellously like truth", his daughter, Virginia Woolf underlined that "Reality, fact, substance" dominated the story.
As for Ian Watt, he wrote that "when the story appeared it is reported to have been universally received and credited as a genuine story".
On the contrary, Swift's novel is fantastic and unrealistic.
Crusoe's ordinary island would have rung false compared to the Lilliputs, the giants and the flying island of Gulliver's voyages.
As a consequence, I turned to Treasure Island.
Stevenson's story shares many issues with Defoe's.
Both novelists describe their islands in detail.
In terms of wildlife and vegetation, they are different.
Crusoe finds in his island "many pleasant Savana's or Meadows; plain, smooth and cover'd with Grass , a great deal of Tobacco , Sugar Canes" and he is pleased to observe that there is "no wild Beasts to hurt [him]", whereas "oak-like tress", "swampy willows" or "pines" grow on Treasure Island and there are also "snakes".
Nevertheless, the general descriptions of the two islands are very similar.
Both novelists focus on their hilly landscapes.
For his first exploration of the island, Crusoe decides to go to a hill "which rose up very steep and high, and which seem'd to over-top some other Hills" and he decides to build his habitation in "a little Plain on the side of a rising Hill."
As for Treasure Island, the first description of it focuses on "two low hills, about a couple of miles apart, and rising behind one of them a third and higher hill".
A link could also be drawn between the characters of Robinson Crusoe and Ben Gunn.
The latter has been marooned just as Selkirk and has lived "on goats since then" like Defoe's Crusoe.
Both have made little boats.
In terms of time, the combination of the two novels was interesting.
Stevenson is very vague about the precise year of the treasure hunt.
His narrator, Jim Hawkins, mentions only that "I take up the pen in the year of the grace 17--, and go back to the time when my father kept the 'Admiral Benbow' inn."
This vagueness was an opportunity to seize for my intertextual re-writing since I felt entitled to situate Treasure Island in the 1720's, about forty years after Crusoe's departure.
Similarly, Stevenson does not mention where Treasure Island is situated, consequently, I could give it the same location as Crusoe's island, "near the Spanish dominions" of America.
Finally, in matters of narration, both novels are retrospectively told.
Their first-person narrators are telling events several years after they happened.
All these similarities pointed out that Treasure Island would ideally suit for my Robinson Crusoe re-writing.
Now, the next step was to combine Defoe's novel into Stevenson's.
I decided that Crusoe's story should be regarded only as an anecdote in Treasure Island.
The aim was not to transform Jim Hawkins's adventure, his hunt for Flint's treasure, but only to add another issue to it.
The re-writing had to be incorporated into Treasure Island and the challenge was to find a passage in which the Crusoe's anecdote could be added without changing Stevenson's words.
The part of the novel that I found is at the very end of Chapter Fourteen.
It takes place a few pages after Jim has landed on the island and has witnessed John Silver murdering another sailor.
The young hero realizes that his idea to leave the ship and to go on the island was a mistake and that he is probably going to be murdered by the pirates.
At this point of the story, he is describing the place in which he finds himself.
He mentions that he has "drawn near the foot of a little hill".
I decided that this hill would be the one where Robinson Crusoe built his habitation.
Jim would discover what remains of Crusoe's stay on the island and then, his quest for Flint' treasure would continue.
In order to better define the scope of my project, I have added in the appendix a short epilogue of this new version of Robinson Crusoe.
I presented Jim as the future writer of the life of Robinson Crusoe.
However, the main focus one my work remained on the finding of Crusoe's habitation.
This re-writing had several aims.
The main target was the shift in matters of point of view and narration.
In this project, the hero of Defoe becomes a very minor character since he is only mentioned in an anecdote.
It follows a complex narrational process.
The re-writing brings into play three actual writers - Defoe, Stevenson and myself, and two fictional writers - Crusoe as the writer of his bibliography, Jim as the writer of his adventure and as the writer of Crusoe's story.
Two narrators are competing; Jim as a 'verbal' narrator since he is still given a voice and Robinson as a 'silent' narrator since he is no longer narrating his story but his fictional autobiography, Defoe's novel, is still present in the reader's mind.
Finally, there are two levels of narration: Jim's adventure and Crusoe's story.
Not only Crusoe is no longer the one who speaks but his story is told by someone else.
Jim is the main narrator of Treasure Island and it fell on him to find Crusoe's cave and describe it.
Consequently, Robinson's world is seen by another person.
Jim had to imagine, to make suppositions about the whys and the wherefores.
In that respect, the rewriting had to conform to Jim's narrative style.
I therefore studied the narration of Treasure Island and wrote the Crusoe's anecdote in conformity with the rest of the story.
For example, I kept Jim's use of the grammatical shifter "here".
Even if he writes some years after the events happened and if he is no longer on the island, Jim uses the term "here" as if the events were happening as he tells them.
I found it interesting and worth maintaining.
Similarly, I borrowed some of Jim's words and expressions.
Just before the passage that I chose to incorporate my rewriting, Stevenson's hero sees his end near and writes "It was all over, I thought".
I gave an echo to Jim's words when I wrote "I thought, maybe it was not all over".
Moreover, earlier in the novel, Jim writes "then it was that there came into my head the first of the mad notions that contributed so much to save our lives".
This is the reason why I chose to put the sentence "another notion came into my head".
Finally, my project explores the notion of time.
About forty years are meant to separate Crusoe's story and Jim's visit of the island.
Consequently, I had to focus on the state of Robinson Crusoe's habitation after many years of abandon.
I thus tried to emphasis the idea of decay and rottenness.
I presented the construction which is situated in front of the cave -what Crusoe calls the 'tent', as destroyed.
Except for deterioration, the place had to be similar to the way it had been built.
Another issue concerning time was the blurring of chronology.
Robinson Crusoe was written  before Treasure Island .
However, the composition assumes that Jim is going to write the story of Crusoe some years after his treasure hunt.
As a consequence, Robinson Crusoe is meant to be written after  Treasure Island.
It is with all these ideas in mind that I composed and rewrote.
However, after having completed my rewriting, I found several relevant elements that could have been added.
I might have better explored Jim's internal thoughts and his wondering about what he finds in the cave.
I could have taken this rewriting as an opportunity to underline the almost absurdness of Crusoe's fortification.
Defoe's hero spends so much time in making sure that he can live in security that this part of the story almost becomes more important than his encounter with Friday.
Moreover, as the assignment only required a short rewriting, I had to select only one passage and I chose to focus on the habitation.
However, there are many other ideas that I wish I could have developed.
I thought that Jim or Ben Gunn could have found the traces of Crusoe's plantation or his goat-fences and speculate on them.
I could have used Souhami and Coetzee's novels.
I only resorted to the Souhami text in my epilogue when I mentioned the Cinque Ports.
Defoe does not provide his readers with the name of Crusoe's ship, so I had to find one as was necessary for my denouement.
I also used Souhami's book when I referred to Richard Steele.
As for the Coetzee text, it was useful insofar as I did not feel guilty to 'kill' Crusoe since it is also what the South African novelist did.
To conclude, this re-writing has been a new and enriching experience.
First it allowed me to revisit a myth, Robinson Crusoe, and to remould it.
Secondly, it entitled me to realize what I have often wished to do.
Many times, I have finished a novel, felt disappointed by the end and imagined an alternative ending.
I have now understood that I am not was a 'fussy' reader.
Intervening in others novels is in fact common practise even among many renowned novelists.
A small plain stretched on one side of the hill.
A little wood was nested between the green of the plain and the rock of the hill.
The trees, here, had grown so thick that a person could hardly walk through them.
I was about to set off my walk again, when another notion came into my head.
It occurred to me that if somebody had wanted to hide something, they could not have found a better place than this little wood.
It looked so impenetrable; no men could ever see if something was beyond it.
I felt hopeful again, I thought, maybe, it was not all over.
With great difficulties, I started to make my way through the wood.
I reached a little winding passage which eventually led me to a raw of trees.
On one of them was a little ladder.
I rejoiced at the sight of it, this fortification was the work of men.
As I was climbing the ladder, the palpitations of my heart were getting stronger and stronger.
Maybe just a few paces remained between Flint's treasure and me.
On the other side of the ladder, I found a little open-space of green.
At the other end stood a second wall with a ladder.
Behind it, at the foot of the cliff, I discovered some kind of buildings.
Several pitches were here, probably, they had been used to uphold some sort of roof of which just a few pieces of wood remained, lying on the floor.
Judging by the state of decay, no one has been living here for many years.
Behind the ruins, the rock opened into a cave which had been converted into several rooms.
On the floor were lying quantities of very old objects, such as nails, ironworks, a sort of mortar and some kind of candles.
The walls had been cut into shelves on which were put dozens of baskets and pots in clay.
All these objects had curious shapes as if they had been the work of a child.
I searched them in the hope of finding worthy articles but most of them were empty and I only found some residue of corn and a little quantity of powder.
In the main room stood two chairs and one table, on top of which I found a book, though it was extremely rotten and impossible to handle, I managed to decipher its title, it was a Bible.
Hung at a corner of the cave were several pieces of old and decayed animal skin.
As I was looking behind them to make sure they were not hiding something, I realized that they had actually been cut to make jackets and breeches.
I was intrigued by the singular place that I had just discovered.
Somebody had lived here many years ago and had made the best of the little he owned.
Considering the state of what was left, the construction dated back to before the time when Flint came to the island and hid his treasure.
As I was pondering on all the mystery surrounding this place, I suddenly heard a noise.
Fear ran through me at the thought of being found here by John Silver, but I eventually distinguished the shapes of three wild cats huddled in a corner of the cave.
Although I felt reassured, I was still not at ease in that place, it gave me claustrophobic feelings, and therefore, I decided to leave the spot and I went back to the open plain.
However, for me, not everything was solved.
After having received my part of the treasure and properly settled my mother and myself, I started to think again of this mysterious habitation hidden between the dense little wood.
Who had lived there and why had he, if it was a he, built so many fences to protect him?
He probably thought himself in great danger, otherwise it was mere paranoia.
I wanted to know more and to solve this mystery.
Benn Gunn turned to be a considerable help in my search.
A few months after being marooned, he had discovered the cave, but finding nothing worth in it, he had not attached importance to it and had preferred to establish his habitation in a place where he could observe the sea.
He had judged this cave too secluded.
Before we left the island, Benn Gunn had shown me a square post on the beech, on which was written "I come on shore here the 30 th of September 1659".
Around the sides of the spot were cut hundreds and hundreds notches.
Ben Gunn had showed me how every seventh notch was longer than the others; he had wondered a lot about the meaning of it and eventually understood that it was a calendar, a reckoning of time.
Ben had counted them, one after the other, and found that the counting of time had stopped in 1686, twenty-eight years, two months and ninety days after its starting point.
It was about twenty years before Flint landed on the island and hid his treasure.
Ben Gunn also gave me a considerable clue: the name of a ship, the Cinque Port.
He had found it written on a pair of perspective-glass, the only object he had found worth taking.
With these dates and this name, I went to a marine record office and little by little my search led me to the name of a man.
The Cinque Ports had left Brazil to go to Guinea on the 1 st of September 1659.
After that, no one heard from it until 1687 when a Robinson Crusoe claimed that the Cinque Ports had sunk on her way to Africa and that after the wreckage, he had spent twenty-eight years alone in a deserted island.
The story started to gain momentum and Crusoe was introduced to Richard Steele, the author of the Spectator.
However, Robinson Crusoe took the sea; he had to go to Portugal for important business.
His ship was caught in a storm.
All the people died Robinson Crusoe with them and his story with him.
But, Robinson Crusoe and his island could come to life again.
A book could be written, I had seen the way he had built his house, I had seen his way to remember the passing of time and I could add so more, the making of a canoe to escape, how he managed to grew corn, his pet animals and why not an encounter with an indigene.
So much could be written, an amazing story, the life of Robinson Crusoe.
Is the use of time in narrative important?
If so, why?
Before these questions can be discussed in further detail, first it is necessary to clarify what narrative is.
Simply put, a narrative is a story.
How a writer, poet or playwright chooses to use time affects how the story is told, for example the events can be related in a simple, chronological order or with the use of flashbacks.
Time is, in essence, a structural device that can be used to achieve a deliberate affect on a reader or audience.
The concept of 'time' discussed in this essay can be defined as a component of a story, or a structural tool.
E. M. Forster certainly saw time as an important element of narrative.
"In the novel", he says, "the allegiance to time is imperative: no novel could be written without it".
But is the same true for a play?
A time sequence is still present in a plot, although, again using Forster's terminology, "the sense of causality overshadows it".
It is easier to create a precise sense of time in a novel than in a play, simply because there is a narrator throughout.
Perhaps inevitably then, the use of time differs across literary genres.
This essay aims to compare the use of time in Shakespeare's The Winter's Tale  and Jane Austen's Emma .
Both have revolutionised the use of time in narrative to some extent, and so provide interesting texts for discussion.
Before Shakespeare, Renaissance dramatists were expected to comply with Aristotle's 'Three Unities'.
Aristotle recommended that the events in a play should occur over a time scale of no more than twenty-four hours .
Shakespeare deliberately ridicules the 'unity of time' in The Winter's Tale - it is referred to with an ironic tone in The Chorus of Time; The phrase "impute it not a crime"  tells us that Shakespeare is knowingly breaking the rule of the 'unity of time'.
This is not the first occasion on which Shakespeare refuses to abide by the conventional use of time in Renaissance drama.
Neither is this his only play that has a choric narrator.
Shakespeare also uses choric narrators in Pericles and Henry V, but it is the fact that the narrator in The Winter's Tale is the personification of time itself that has interested critics.
Shakespeare's unique treatment of time in The Winter's Tale is largely responsible for the play's originality as a whole.
Through disregarding the 'unity of time' and using time to function as a narrator, Shakespeare has more freedom to explore the nature of time and its effects.
Far from being controversial, Austen's use of time as a structural factor in Emma is typical of the early novel.
Though as the term 'novel' means 'new', we would expect the genre itself to be innovative in some way.
The novel was the first literary form that attempted to accurately depict everyday life, a characteristic that Ian Watt coined 'formal realism'.
In terms of 'formal realism', the sense of time generated through a text can potentially add "a new dimension to reality".
M. H. Abrams describes the aim of realistic fiction as follows; Austen uses time to do exactly this.
Emma is grounded in an ordinary, credible time scheme; the passing of time and the progression of the story are gradual and uninterrupted - just like in real life.
This is effective at creating realism, because the characters in the novel experience time as the reader does.
Another structural feature of Emma is that the reader is often informed of the time period that has passed since the last significant incident, either through dialogue or the narration.
For example; "a week had not passed since Miss Hawkins's name was first mentioned in Highbury" , and "a very few days had passed after this adventure, when..." .
This technique of frequently referring to the passing of time is essential for the progression of the story, because it constantly edges the narrative forward.
This is ultimately the function of Shakespeare's choric narrators, although the major difference is that the progression in time is not gradual and constant as it is in the novel.
Some critics maintain that the time gap of sixteen years gives the play a disjointed feel, perhaps like the 'year and a day' technique in fairytales and nursery rhymes.
The use of time can manipulate the interpretation of a text; for example, the world portrayed in it can be realistic or histrionic depending on the time scheme used.
At one extreme, fairytales deliberately escape the notion of time - a classic quote to illustrate this point is the customary opening of 'Once upon a time...'.
Similarly, Shakespeare refuses to be specific in his depiction of time in The Winter's Tale.
This is not to say that he disregards time as an issue.
Time is referred to throughout the play using figurative language and imagery.
For example, Camillo remarks; Shakespeare's choice of the word 'branch' is ambiguous.
This is significant as it highlights the dual nature of time, both as a creator and a destroyer.
On one hand 'branch' could be interpreted as to flourish or extend.
These meanings have positive connotations and imply that time is a creator.
However, 'branch' can also mean diverge or separate.
This interpretation gives a more negative view of time as a destroyer.
This is equally true for the somewhat paradoxical statement in The Chorus of Time - Shakespeare points out that rules are made in time, but can also be destroyed in time.
Although there are references to the passing of time in The Winter's Tale, these are not particularised.
Locke's 'principle of individuation' is the theory that "ideas become general by separating from them the circumstances of time and place".
Therefore, as the play does not limit itself to a particular time and place, the themes and issues explored have a universal and timeless quality - perhaps more so than those in Emma.
So far, we have seen how the use of time can alter the degree of realism.
Its other main function, which is prominent when comparing these texts, is to limit or enable character development.
Watt observes that "many novelists...have made their subject the exploration of the personality as it is defined in the interpenetration of its past and present self-awareness".
Time is crucial in terms of character development; because characters are elaborated on and disentangled through time.
Usually a longer time scale is needed to do this successfully .
It would be impossible for the action in The Winter's Tale to take place over a maximum of twenty-four hours, because the character development of Leontes is fundamental to the plot.
As Howard Felperin acknowledges, The Winter's Tale "reveals much more of the vital information concerning the principals than is, strictly speaking, required by the plot or usual even in a Shakespearean play".
The characters in The Winter's Tale have a past, and  a future.
This is equally true in Emma; Austen offers us a brief account of Emma's past and her present situation in the first four paragraphs.
In this respect The Winter's Tale and Emma are surprisingly similar - the central character is developed over time.
This is made possible primarily by the length of the time scale employed.
In his essay entitled The Structural Pattern , Ernest Schanzer emphasises how the first half of The Winter's Tale is replicated again in the second.
The function of the Chorus of Time is not only important to highlight the contrast, but also the structural similarities.
Schanzer argues that "by his gesture of turning the hour-glass Time...creates in us a feeling of repetition".
His point that "both parts of the hour-glass look alike" is a valid and significant one.
Each half of the hour-glass is a mirror image of the other.
In many respects, so is each half of the play.
Therefore in answer to those critics such as Panofsky who believe that "the figure of Father Time is used as a mere device to indicate the lapse of months, years or centuries", the Chorus of Time not only functions as a narrator, but also as a structural device to emphasise the repetition of events in the second half of the play.
It is easy to underestimate the importance of time, as it has a more subtle presence in narrative than, for example, the plot or central characters.
Nonetheless, after a close analysis of a text it is clear that its use of time is fundamental to its interpretation.
After all, every writer or dramatist uses time, whether they intend to or not.
I think Johnson had a valuable point when he said "Time is, of all modes of existence, most obsequious to the imagination: a lapse of years is as easily conceived as a passage of hours".
This is a fact that is fundamental to story-telling, for we need to believe and accept the time scheme of the narrative before the story can be told.
Graphologically it would appear that the extracts share a similar form, as both are examples of dialogic prose that use the presence of a narrating voice to engage with the reader.
Similitude in thematic content emerges as both centre on the nature of nighttime in the streets below, but the images generated are far from analogous.
Divergence in tone also surfaces as one warmly welcomes the reader in, while the other promotes a firm sense of exclusion.
The first extract opens with a declarative minor sentence that instantly plunges the reader into the word described; 'From my window, the deep solemn massive street.'
Heaped pre-modifying adjectives and the absence of a verb make it reminiscent of a stage direction, as it directly illustrates the scene below.
Commencing the following line with; 'Cellar-shops,' fortifies this impression by centring our attention on the physical aspects of the street, making the setting easy to envision.
Prolific adjectives intensify this vivid visual realism while generating a sombre atmosphere as; 'dirty,' 'shabby' and 'tarnished,' create an impression of gloom and despondency, consolidated by the bleak nuances connoted with 'shadow.'
The simile; 'houses like shabby monumental safes,' engenders a sense of decaying past decadence as the paradoxical; 'bankrupt middle class,' and 'tarnished valuables,' imply loss and fading former glory.
Elongated syntactic structures seem endless and impossible to exit, reinforcing the district's claustrophobic density.
Copious personal pronouns imply the text is a dramatic monologue.
Opening with the possessive pronoun 'my,' firmly imbeds the voice of an involved first person narrator in the text, but they do not appear to be speaking aloud as no reporting clauses or graphological markings denote a speech act.
'I am a camera' de-personalises the narrator through metaphoric objectification as they are; 'open, quite passive, recording.'
'Not thinking' conveys a feeling of numb disenchantment that de-humanises them further by suggesting that they have disengaged the mind and simply exist.
Remaining 'open' implies a longing to be part of the community described as the narrator appears firmly external, possibly because of their foreign status.
Distance is suggested by using 'the man' and 'the woman' as opposed to the names of the neighbours.
This implies a lack of contact between them that erodes the normal specificity and intimacy generated by using definite articles; they are familiar only because of their physical proximity.
The allusion to 'kimono' suggests a language barrier may prevent them making contact, reinforcing the narrator's alienated position and sense of longing.
The unwelcoming, harsh, glottal plosive /k/ in; 'clock' and 'locked,' is virtually onomatopoeic, making the sense of exclusion that permeates the extract almost tangible.
The progressive present tense animates the scene by providing immediacy.
Activities such as 'shaving' and hair washing imply it is morning but the insistence generated by the modal verb 'will,' engenders a temporal elasticity that accelerates the advancement of nighttime.
'Will' metamorphoses into the present tense, transitive verb 'are,' bringing us back from the future to the present, creating a disorientating and unexpected time shift with; 'The shops are shut.'
It is the shortest sentence and creates a rhythmic variation that halts our reading in order to emphasise the narrator's categorical exclusion.
Sudden, forceful plosive /t/ and /p/ sounds reinforce the abrasive and hostile staccato rhythm of the monosyllabic words used.
The fricative sibilant sound parallelism connecting 'shops' to 'shuts,' creates a sinister stillness that intensifies the transition to a more ominous tone in the foreboding statement; 'And soon the whistling will begin.'
Beginning this sentence with 'And' uses syntactic deviation to mirror the change in the district's atmosphere, while opening in medias res creates an immediacy that moves our focus back to the future.
The ability to; 'hire a room by the hour' makes the world outside seem increasingly sordid and dark.
Repeated use of the co-ordinator 'and' in; 'Their signals echo down the deep hollow street, lascivious and private and sad,' makes the sentence sound like an echo, while reducing the syllabic length of the post-modifying adjectives creates a sense of fading away.
Interpolating the 'and' between words gives each an equal prominence that foregrounds their semantic significance.
'lascivious' implies that the men want only physical gratification, but the 'deep hollow' suggests more of an emotional void, a desire for warmth and companionship similar to that felt by the narrator.
The tone becomes increasingly seedy due to the sexual undertones of lines such as; 'They want to be let in,' although menacing in tone, the statement remains tinged with poignancy, as the men seem to yearn more for company and welcome.
Juxtaposing the burning lamps and 'lighted windows of warm rooms,' against the image of those outside in the dark, 'down there in the cold', reinforces the sense of division between the communal and the excluded, as tactile sensory descriptions of light and heat intensify the contrastive gloom, making the external position appear increasingly lonely.
The third person plural pronouns 'they,' and 'their,' in the final paragraph centre our perspective on the men and children, but returning to the first person 'I' and 'me,' moves our attention from the wider world to the narrator's emotions.
Like a video camera, the writer uses spatial dimensions to alter the angles that we watch the scene from by shifting our focus between cellar, street, and balcony.
The camera metaphor is therefore indirectly extended as the narrator moves in and out of the self, panning the world around, literally becoming the camera in monitoring and recording the actions of others.
The; 'slats of the venetian blind,' act almost like a metonymic camera shutter impairing the narrator's view, forcing them to become human again.
This leads to a greater introspective and emotional focus that exposes their loneliness and segregation; 'I am in a foreign city, alone, far from home.'
Like the calling, their feelings become impossible to ignore; 'soon a call is sure to sound, so piercing, so insistent, so despairingly human.'
Parallelism is generated through the repetition of 'so,' creating a rhythmic intensity that fortifies the emotive tone.
Dashes in the final sentence fracture both form and narration, pausing the reader by producing a stressed silence that generates a suspended feeling of interminable isolation.
Throughout the extract modal verbs are used create a sense of certainty, which foregrounds the change to 'could not' in; 'it could not possibly be- for me.'
Here it implies a doubtful yet vague hope that someone is aware of the narrator's presence, intensifying the palpable, melancholic despondency that pervades the conclusion.
Both passages employ narrative report to describe a journey through the streets below; the first literal, the second surreal.
As in the first extract, the immediacy of the present tense thrusts the reader into the scene.
The direct address and imperative verb; 'Listen,' demands both attention and compliance; focus on sound quality is essential to our understanding here, as meaning is highly dependent on our interpretation of certain sound effects.
Prolific aural manipulation implies it should be read aloud, as how words resonate can affect the auditory image they generate.
This interplay between sound and sense is demonstrated by the plosive alliterative consonance in; 'bonnet and brooch and bombazine black..and bootlace bow,' as the explosive properties of voiced bi-labial plosives creates the impression of noise.
Abnormal paradigms signal that the world described is not that of the everyday.
Neologisms such as 'bombazine' and 'neddying' employ lexical deviation to create ambiguity; as with dreams, deciphering the intended meaning of these unfamiliar words seems impossible.
Certain neologisms can make it difficult to envision the world described as they have no definitive meaning, but this mystifying uncertainty augments the extract's dreamlike quality.
Although; 'it is night', allusions to clothing, bustle and noise generate a vivid visual image of an enlivened church service that is evocative of daytime.
'Fortywinking hallelujah' engenders a similar temporal ambiguity to that of the first extract by taking us back to night, suggesting that the scene is part of a dream.
The simile; 'coughing like nannygoats,' conjures an impression of the exact noise created; direct comparison as opposed to metaphorical substitution is a less complex use of imagery which implies that the extract may be directed towards children.
Enumerated commas and semi-colons fortify this impression by creating elongated, lulling syntactic structures that are reminiscent of those found in nursery rhymes.
The subsequent simile; 'like a mouse with gloves' is also simple and explicit, invoking a stereotypically fairy-tale image of a clothed mouse.
It also provides a stark contrast to the raucous spectacle occurring in the dream by emphasizing the night's silence, as even the hush of scratching paws is muffled.
Repeated insertion of the conjunction 'and' creates a sense of excitement in; 'the movements and countries and mazes and colours,' as the night becomes a time for travel, discovery and exhilaration.
Alternating between words that begin with 'm' and 'c' creates multiple parallelisms that enable the form to mirror the ebb and flow of the metaphoric; 'big seas of their dreams,' as 'flight and fall' evokes an image of wave movement.
Innovative personification in; 'It is tonight in Donkey street, trotting silent..along the cockled cobbles,' adds to the extract's surreal, imaginary quality as the night appears to become the donkey.
The active, dynamic verb 'trotting,' makes the reader feel that they too are on a journey, as the adverbial 'along,' and 'past,' moves our position and perspective forward.
The extract is almost a linguistic painting; allusions to 'pictures' and 'water colours' coupled with the shift to; 'Look,' signals an increased occurrence of visual imagery in the second paragraph.
Here numerous transitive, non-finite verbs such as; 'winding' and 'tumbling,' illustrate movement realistically, thus intensifying the vibrancy and animation in the scene.
Intriguingly, as the visual depictions become sharper and more vivid, the situation becomes increasingly unrealistic and vague.
The text has a firm cohesive structural configuration as almost all sentences in the first two paragraphs begin; 'It is night' with lexical deviation occurring in the more immediate; 'It is tonight.'
Refrain-like repetition of 'It is night 'and 'Only you' fortifies the melodic linguistic texture by generating a musical quality.
The extract is littered with parallelism, alliteration and rhythmic syntactic structures that provide textual variety and make it highly poetic.
Visually indented singular lines such as; 'Time passes.
Listen.
Time passes,' compel the reader to pause and focus on the actual advancement of time, yet are more commonly associated with poetry.
'Come closer now,' moves back to the direct address creating structural and semantic variation by inviting us in further.
Having been outside with the night, we then penetrate people's minds and dreams in a manner not dissimilar to that of the first extract.
Such a markedly direct address leads us to question if the extract is an example of speech, but like the first extract, the absence of reporting clauses and quotation marks suggests otherwise.
A narrating voice is firmly imbedded in the text, but no personal pronouns directly connect either the writer or a protagonist to the action.
'Only you' almost allows the reader to become the absent central character, efficaciously drawing us in.
Passive reading is made impossible by the demand for active participation in creating the world described; 'Only you can hear and see, behind the eyes of the sleepers.'
Moving the reader beyond the traditionally external position is typical of children's literature, as its persuasive tenor tends to make the reader feel imperative and encourages a belief in the impossible.
The personification; 'you can hear the houses sleeping in the streets in the slow..salt and silent..night,' utilises the quiet fricative release of air from multiple sibilant /s/ sounds to enact the presence of silence, almost making this implausible statement credible.
Contextually specific regionalisms and Welsh names such as 'Dai' and 'Bethesda,' utilize idiolect to capture the national voice.
Deviant spelling in the simile; 'quiet as a dominoe,' utilises the additional 'e' in domino to makes the stress fall at the end of the word.
Reversing the conventional stress pattern alters the rhythmic propensity of certain phrases, while melodious polysyllabic words such as; 'harmonium,' help to enact the stereotypical lyricism of the Welsh accent.
Unlike the preceding text, proper nouns are used for places and people creating a strong sense of community and familiarity.
Like the street and discourse, the décor of the houses is uniquely cobbled together, as copious concrete proper nouns are concurrently heaped within a densely intertwined litany; 'holy dresser, watercolours..china dog.'
Although certain words are neologisms, their phonetic properties provide mimetic clues to their meaning.
'It is night neddying among the snuggeries of babies,' uses nasal phonemes to generate a comforting sense of being snug, secure and protected.
Here night is not dark and menacing, but brings liberation and safety as people are freed in their dreams.
Both writers manipulate language and form with dexterity; although similar literary devices are employed, they are used to create highly divergent effects.
The dark realism of the first extract is highlighted when placed against the extremely whimsical tone of the second, something that stems in part from the poetic language and form used.
While the societies illustrated differ greatly, both writers effectively make them easy to envision through innovative use of visual imagery, personification and metaphor.
Although little similitude exists between the images generated, abundant verbal artistry and rhetorical deftness allows the reader to enter the unfamiliar worlds depicted.
In this essay I intend to study the different interpretations history in Waterland has undergone since the publication of the novel in 1983.
At the time Waterland was released, New Historicism and Poststructuralism dominated literary criticism.
However, during the 1990s, criticism turned towards ethics, therefore, newer readings of Swift's novel devote themselves to the ethical and psychological considerations of Waterland.
I aim to cover this wide range of readings and interpretations.
In one of the earliest readings of Waterland, Del Ivan Janik pinned down the three main threads of history the novel develops: history as inquiry, as a subject and as stories.
These three sides of the same theme have led to multiple interpretations and readings in the light of postmodernism, trauma studies or advocacy criticism.
In 'The Novels of Graham Swift', Tamás Bényei states that literary criticism of Swift's novels either tends to study what Linda Hutcheon names "historiographic metafiction" and predominantly looks at Waterland, or, review of all of his novels, focusing on mourning and melancholia.
A few years later, Stef Craps took this further, identifying a third trend of humanist ethical criticism which takes Swift's fiction as realist.
Linda Hutcheon set the premises for the study of history in Waterland, thanks to her definition of "historiographic metafiction" in 1988 which she continues exploring in posterior studies.
Hutcheon seeks to enquire the relationship between fiction and history.
Her study is still referenced and contested by critics today.
Hutcheon's studies correspond to the trends in criticism during the 1980s.
Her reading of Waterland is clearly poststructuralist as she is fascinated by its representation of history.
Hutcheon responds to critics who accuse postmodernism of denying history and insists on Waterland not rejecting history but reinterpreting it from the present.
History in postmodernism is characterised by its problematic relationship with the present and its deconstruction in texts, fragmented narratives and subjective narrators, such as Waterland's Tom Crick, are essential means to do so.
History is depicted in Waterland as a detotalized and subjective reality; it becomes a constructed discourse just like fiction.
Historiographic metafiction challenges history and Waterland's self awareness enables it to examine the state of history.
Hutcheon's exploration of historiographic metafiction and Waterland argues for the relevance of history in postmodernism.
However, she leaves a gap as regards the effect the treatment of history may have, besides the questioning of its trueness, which is filled in by posterior studies.
Pamela Cooper and Donald P. Kaczvinsky continue from Hutcheon's definition of historiographic metafiction and open a new area for the interpretation of Waterland as they bring in postcolonialism.
Cooper accentuates the contradictory and problematic qualities of history Waterland considers; however, she researches this within a postcolonial frame.
Cooper discerns the imperialistic aspects present in the novel and studies how they serve to examine history.
Cooper inaugurates a debate about women stating that the postmodern issues of women's sexuality and role in history are also evident in Waterland.
She plays up the episodes concerning reproduction and women and conveys how they translate into the form of a threat to the rigid structures of imperialism and linear progression.
Kaczvinsky also brings postcolonialism into his reading of Swift's work.
However, he bares a more typically historicist interpretation.
He believes Waterland may be seen as a piece of historiographic metafiction, which, through its commitment to history, endeavours to scrutinize distress related to history, stating the novel's major concern is the fact that history may have reached its end.
Swift strives to create a national identity, exhibiting the complexity and rebuttal of history through the metaphorical Fens.
David Malcolm reviews Graham Swift's oeuvre in depth in one of the few monographic studies of the author, Understanding Graham Swift, in 2005.
Malcolm carries out a stimulating exploration of the metafictional quality of Swift's novels as notes that Waterland is rich in genre collation.
He claims the genre overlapping is closely related to its study of history and explanatory striving.
The protagonist looks for a way to grasp reality and truth.
Swift borrows from a variety of genres to illustrate this tension and the problematic relationship between history, reality and the present.
The evaluation of the validity of different narratives relates to its evaluation of history.
The interaction between fiction and history is an essential aspect to consider when studying Waterland.
Historians John Brewer and Stella Tillyard and critic George P. Landow concentrate on this dichotomy in their readings of the novel.
Aligned with the postmodern criticism of the time, Brewer and Tillyard believe history and fiction are by no means incompatible.
They expand on the debate Waterland introduces as regards private history and story-telling versus official history and reiterate the supremacy of the former over the latter.
The historians insist on the fictional side of history and stress the relevance of fiction to history writing; they utilise the novel's reflections to argue the increasing importance of alternative histories and claim Waterland thus illustrates the evolution history writing has also experienced.
However, the historians are disappointed with Waterland as it hints at the victory of story-telling and natural history over official history but does not reach the conclusive resolution they support.
Brewer and Tillyard illustrate a particular branch of thought and investigation of the 1980s with their postmodern view of history.
Nevertheless, they only discuss the depiction of history in Waterland in depth, overlooking any other side it may have.
In his poststructuralist reading of Waterland, Landow builds on the relationship between history and fiction.
He agrees with the inaugural link Brewer and Tillyard placed between history and story-telling, and contributes by exploring Waterland as a postmodernist autobiographical text; therefore he concentrates on the protagonist's construction of personal history rather than the portrayal of national history.
Landow indicates that Waterland's particular donation to postmodernism resides in the fact that the protagonist is in the middle of a crisis, therefore his account fails to be unimpeachable.
Crick's exploration matches the inquisitive function of history other critics have identified.
However, in considering the novel a fictional life story, Landow casts a light on autobiographical writing through invoking its reverberations in Waterland.
Landow discusses the implications of story-telling and highlights how Crick argues for the need of history based on his desire to discover the reasons that have led to his present situation.
This explanatory and investigative task leads to the construction of personal histories, hence, Landow's study of autobiography.
In the light of a Marxist reading, John Schad recovers the postmodern theme of the end of history which Tom Crick muses on in Waterland.
His reading of the novel represents the advocacy criticism that emerged in literary criticism in the 1980s.
Damon Marcel Decoste retrieves Schad's reading, but is immersed in the repercussions for the inquisitive facet of history.
Schad identifies a political side to the end of history pointed to in Waterland, which he names a "politics of nothing" which, in his opinion, derives in a "theology of nothing".
In Schad's view, the religious and the revolutionary are intertwined.
Schad points to a series of events in Waterland's story that have both a religious and a political signification.
Besides the clear Marxist meaning Schad identifies in the revolutionary acts Crick refers to in the novel, he also interprets a religious one.
Furthermore, Schad highlights the references to exchange and capitalism in Waterland.
Crick's wife Mary kidnaps a baby, she believes is sent from God, from a supermarket, and Schad even draws attention to the relevance of Crick's pupil Price, whose name brings capitalism to mind and whose ideas personify the tension between capitalism and revolution.
Decoste distances himself from other critics to focus strongly on the inquisitive dimension of history in Waterland which critics such as Schad or Landow overlook.
Decoste agrees with Schad's earlier interpretation of the end of history, but underlines the relevance of exploring history as an endless inquiry now that historical investigation may avoid the end of history and its circularity: it implies a never ending study into the past.
Furthermore, Decoste echoes a New humanist interpretation.
He concludes Waterland refers to one's responsibility in the world; Decoste believes in one's ability for inquiry as the alternative to, and the means to defeat, the nothingness of reality Crick alludes to.
Decoste claims Swift hopes to provoke in the reader the responsibility to question historical narratives and "fairy-tale endings".
Graham Swift is also read as a Postmodern Realist.
Catherine Bernard and Amy J. Elias identify Swift as a reworker of the traditional novel.
They value Hutcheon's contribution to understanding Swift; however, these critics centre on the novelist's realist heritage.
In 'Meta-mimesis?
The problem of British Postmodern Realism' Elias elucidates the poststructuralist readings of Waterland as she considers Swift's novel to be a postmodern realist work.
Elias separates herself from Hutcheon to identify subgenres in postmodern fiction.
Her study contains hints of the ethical turn in criticism during the 1990s; she follows a poststructuralist approach but concentrates on the text's content rather than style.
As Elias explains, Waterland does not easily fit into the experimental style of postmodernism nor Realism.
Elias discusses whether Waterland, and similar novels, could be creating a new genre and suggests a new thread of criticism should study this "postmodern Realism".
Elias suggests that Waterland disintegrates and imitates realism.
She argues Postmodern realist novels develop "realistic rationale for the action that takes place within its pages, and yet the world...each records is distinctly postmodern".
Elias shows how Waterland fits into this category as Crick's primal focus is on his own life, hence satisfying Realism; and his story epitomises postmodern concerns.
Furthermore, Elias details her interpretation and proposes Waterland as "psychological Realism" because Crick reveals his psychological situation.
Likewise, Waterland projects a personal situation to a whole society, therefore, it may also be described as "social Realism".
Bernard introduced the debate of postmodern Realism in her earlier work, Graham Swift: La parole chronique and in 'Dismembering/Remembering Mimesis'.
Bernard also advocates for the reworking of Realism in Swift's novels as a means of representing postmodern concerns; however, her approach pays attention to the linguistic materiality of Waterland, proper of the first wave of poststructuralist readings of the 1980s, rather that the genre/content approach Elias carries out.
History is summoned in Waterland to explain the present.
Waterland branches out to produce a never-ending inquiry and establishes links between individuals and their histories but only reveals the impossibility of finding real answers.
Therefore, Bernard agrees with Hutcheon, the reworking of traditional Realism displays a postmodern view of the world.
Bernard echoes historicism, in particular, historiographer Hayden White's ideas.
She sees Waterland turn to a contextualist model of history through the need to pursue investigation into individual histories.
Even though the traumatic events of the past have an explanatory task, they actually serve to reveal the limitations of language and discourse.
Turning to history requires a backward motion, from present to past.
Waterland's discourse reflects this through its fragmented structure, repetitions and metaphors, and shifts from past to present tenses.
Crick's argument that history repeats itself is conveyed through the repeated metaphors and as Bernard analyses, the shifts in tenses serve to manifest the fragility of the present faced by the power of the past.
Reality challenges discourse now that it takes language to its own limit reflecting the trauma history and the past bring; hence, language suffers just like Waterland's protagonists do.
The reality and the truth Waterland reveal are excessive, therefore its representation is strenuous.
Randall Stevenson gathers Swift's references to historical events to identify the Englishness in the novel.
These evoked memories are crucial elements due to their portrayal of historical events and consequent creation of a national identity.
Echoing a historicist reading of Waterland, Stevenson claims the legacy of the Second World War is particularly strong in the memories surfaced and in the historical narrative of the novel.
The importance of official centralist history for Stevenson clearly lies in the depiction of the war and its immediate consequences for the protagonists.
Far from the study of historical representation in discourse and language, and returning to the historicist ideas Bernard points to, Hanne Tange carries out a regionalist reading of Waterland.
As opposed to Stevenson's reading, Tange identifies the importance of regional history to portray how Waterland denounces centralism.
Cairn Craig's Out of history paradigm, which Tange takes to study the use of history in Waterland, is based on the notions of peripherality and centralism, echoing the concepts Bernard alludes to.
Traditional history has always offered a centralist perspective, obviating marginal experience.
Regionalism responds to this, giving a voice to the periphery.
Waterland offers a substitute to Britishness.
Tange demonstrates how the protagonist embraces peripherality, Tom Crick abandons national and international history in favour of the history of his own region.
Tange believes Waterland voices Swift's rejection of Thatcherite centralism.
She does not treat the text as an independent product but regards its socio-historical context.
Tange believes Crick's inquiry into history, and consequent realisation that history cannot provide definite answers, represents the social concerns of the early 1980s, when Waterland was published.
Echoing White's philosophy as regards the fictional content of history, Tange accentuates the importance of story-telling in the novel.
Its mythological and escapist qualities, and relevance to marginal culture, are also evidence of Swift's campaign against centralism.
Tange originates an interpretation of history zooming in on the implications of the regional and natural histories, thus opening a less developed field of study.
Critics such as Stef Craps, Adrian Poole, Wendy Wheeler and Tamás Bényei have all examined the ethical dimension of Swift's fiction, corroborating the change literary criticism experienced in the 1990s.
Bényei recognises the resemblances between historicist and ethical readings of Swift's novels now that both interpret how the protagonist interrelates with historical events.
He indicates that Waterland distinguishes narrative as a remedy for trauma and also, as a cultural and ethical human act.
Another relevant reflection of Bényei's is that Waterland's narratives are heteroglossic, there are mythological, metaphysical, metahistoric and magical elements which all contribute to Crick's confession and redemptive discourse.
Wheeler picks up from Bényei's interpretation and claims Swift's fiction tries to overcome the characteristic melancholia of modernity.
Poole also addresses the subject of mourning.
He acknowledges the historical depth and cultural memories in Swift's novels and investigates the impact the use of memory has in a social reading.
Poole stresses the importance of kinship, shared experience and collective memory.
The critic discusses personal bonds as a crucial aspect in Swift's work and relates the act of mourning with structure and discourse.
The use of personal narratives and relevance of story-telling ease the act of mourning, it is the characters' way of dealing with loss and guilt and searching for redemption.
The social strand of mourning for Poole lies in the fact that, even though it is a personal experience, it can also be a collective one.
Waterland's characters have participated in certain common experiences and all mourn their loss.
Even though the characters may be separated spiritually or physically, they are nevertheless bonded through these shared realities.
Stef Craps agrees with the readings of Poole and Wheeler and distances herself from those of Schad or Landow which concentrate on history as knowledge.
Without denying the quality of the novel as historiographic metafiction, Craps concentrates on the ethical value of history.
She identifies the main trends in literary criticism and parts herself from trauma studies.
Craps refers to Bernard's reading and agrees with her interpretation of Waterland reusing traditional realist conventions, nevertheless, she states Bernard's reading is limited because she denies any relationship to ethics.
Craps refers to the elements of discourse critics such as Bernard emphasise, but demonstrates how the shifts from past to present tense and the disjointed narrative simply communicate trauma.
While Decoste interpreted the inquisitive side of history as a means to avoid the end of history, Craps interprets it as the way in which to find one's "ethical way of being in the world".
Furthermore, the critic identifies a positive resolution in the novel, echoing new Humanism but distinguishing a tendency towards alterity, now that Craps asserts Waterland's campaign to promote curiosity and inquiry entails a chance to overcome trauma and find "renewal".
More recent critics of Swift's work have responded to Linda Hutcheon's historiographic metafiction.
Daniel Lea and Peter Widdowson both engage in a revision of Swift's oeuvre and illuminate criticism, agreeing on the inadequacy of labelling Swift postmodern.
Besides acknowledging Waterland as historiographic metafiction, Widdowson responds to Hutcheon and questions pigeonholing Swift as a postmodern writer.
In his study, Widdowson also draws attention to the New Humanism of Swift's novels.
Even though Waterland ends in a pessimistic tone, the promotion of love in the novel stands out for the critic as an element of new humanism which, in hand with telling stories, he considers to be Swift's contribution to avoid "postmodern anomie".
Lea places Swift's fiction under the umbrella of social realism.
Even if Swift reflects on major postmodern concerns, Lea also finds it erroneous to limit interpretations of Swift to the frame of postmodernism.
Lea's major argument rests on the weight of psychology in Swift's novels.
Lea illustrates the ethical turn of literary criticism in his interpretation of history and memory.
The protagonist's endeavour to investigate his own past results in the interaction of public and private histories and the study of their common ground.
For Lea, rather than planning a representation of official history, Waterland appraises the psychological implications of, and reasons for, penetrating personal history.
The novel uncovers the consequences major historical events have on its characters.
The protagonist brings back memories, accentuating traumas and serving as an apology, though more obviously as a self-justification.
This therapeutic use of history projects the ethical and psychological edge of the novel.
Moreover, Waterland's narrative mirrors the protagonist's emotional state.
The disordered story, superposition of chronologies and historical eras reflect Crick's unstable mind.
Recovering the mythological references mentioned in Bényei's reading, it is interesting to turn to Philip Tew's study on the mythopoeic value of Swift's fiction.
Widdowson asserts Swift humanizes his characters through the promotion of love and kinship, but for Tew, the humanization lies in the mythical quality of his work.
The engagement with the past and with history ultimately transmits a mythical recovery of it.
The symbolic and imaginary references abound and the novel's protagonist, caught in a crisis and fearing reality, longs for a mythical time.
In The Contemporary British Novel, Philip Tew highlights the mythologizing of history Swift undertakes.
Tew identifies a new trend in contemporary fiction which interrelates history with myth.
Tew confirms the postmodern style of Swift's fiction but only to shift his analysis from the historical realism to the "myth making".
He identifies a nostalgic desire in Waterland, like Poole or Craps, but in his reading, Crick longs for a mythical past.
The protagonist's memories are therapeutic; by travelling to the past and mythologizing history, Crick deals with his present concerns.
Tew quotes Moretti's interpretation of myth and history stating that myths humanize history and by doing so, one finds consolation from reality.
Dominic Head also pinpoints the supernatural and superstition in Waterland.
Picking up on the Postmodern reading of Swift's novels and touching on the ecocriticism that emerged chiefly during the mid 1990s, Head leads to an ecocritical analysis.
He builds on the use of personal memory and, like Lea or Poole, states the personal narratives allow one to read Swift's fiction as social novels and, also, privilege reader's identification.
Head emphasises the way in which narratives amalgamate and clash and brings out the importance of the region like Tange; however, to point up a connection with nature.
Moreover, like Malcolm, Head argues that a range of literary genres overlap but underlines the presence of the provincial novel.
Nevertheless, Head admits that even though Waterland revolves around natural history it ultimately leaves the natural environment aside to privilege human experience.
Fred Botting brings up aspects other critics have studied; however, he adds a new vision through his reading of Waterland's "holes" and "navels".
Botting explains how memory permits an inquiry into history to find the necessary knowledge to fill in history's holes, which demonstrates his affinity with readings such as Decoste's.
Echoing the debate on fact and fiction and genre mixture, mentioned by other critics, Botting suggests fiction may aid the hole-filling and the complex historical investigation results in the presentation of numerous histories.
Holes are also visible in the text's structure and unresolved doubts and unexplained issues, thus linking Botting's reading of holes with Lea's or Crap's interpretations of the novel's disjointed narrative.
Botting uses the cultural and physical symbol of a navel to illustrate the bonds between person and history, and the common elements within the novel.
Botting opens a less examined debate with a reading strongly influenced by psychoanalysis.
The exploration of the origins implies a return to maternal origins.
Also, Botting states that the paternal fails to control feminine sexuality, nature and the real which leads to a paternal-maternal tension.
Cooper's reading of Waterland already introduced this topic but in a postcolonial frame.
Botting identifies history as the womb in which the quest develops; this exploration brings up more psychoanalytical issues such as hysteria, desire and lack, related to the incessant inquiry and unexplainable events; or doubling and repetition, linked to trauma and repression.
All of Waterland's critics, independently of their school of thought, seem to agree on its historical baggage and its concern for the past's weight on the present.
However, Botting reinterprets this claiming the openness of history.
In his opinion, the possibility of revisiting the past shows that they have no definite meaning, set by the present or by the past.
Wendy Wheeler notices how Waterland depictures the "transformation of a sublimely ungraspable 'nothing' into the 'something' of the everyday".
This revolution illustrates the evolving reading of Swift's fiction.
Looking into history in Waterland entails a riveting study, giving rise to debates as regards historical validity, ethical implications or even governmental policies.
It attracts, and at times confronts, interpretations from different critical theories.
The heterogeneous range of readings conveys how the novel has encouraged in depth analyses since its publication and still nurtures critics to reflect on it, interpreting and reinterpreting the presentation and ramifications of history.
This introductory quote is taken from James' book 'Toussaint L'Ouverture and the San Domingo Revolution.'
For James, Francois Dominique Toussaint L'Ouverture is the figure of freedom and liberty for the eighteenth century genre of slave narratives.
He led the only successful slave rebellion in the colonies, against the French in Haiti in 1791.
During the Romantic era, common opinions of slavery were based upon Aristotle's philosophies that "from the hour of their birth, some men are marked out for subjection, others for rule."
It was these prejudices and overwhelming oppressions that black writers and poets had to overcome.
As Davis comments "the purported connection between the act of writing and the 'rights of man' did not escape the notice of the slave."
Through the mastery of language, slave writers were able to use poetry and prose as a powerful tool to "write themselves into being."
I will examine such issues in the core of my essay, concentrating on the works of Wordsworth, Coleridge, Southey and Cowper.
In 1802, the year of Toussaint's capture and imprisonment in France, Wordsworth composed a sonnet dedicated 'To Toussaint L'Ouverture.'
It portrays Toussaint in the dungeons of the Castle of Joux.
Following, the popular trope of the noble savage Wordsworth portrays Toussaint as a "man of men," a proud exoticised "chieftain," who nobly wears " a cheerful brow" throughout his torture.
These notions portray Toussaint as a feeling human being,, which contests popular opinions of blacks as unfeeling creatures.
Wordsworth tactfully employs Nature, an acceptable, comfortable medium by which to discuss the inflammatory subject of slavery.
Pastoral images of the 'rural milkmaid' tending her 'cow' equate Toussaint nature.
This tactic is employed further when 'air, earth and skies' are employed as his 'allies.'
Similarly, Wordsworth incorporates the trope of the 'noble savage' into the trope of sensibility to remove the threat and reality of the slave rebellions in the colonies.
The hyperbole showing Toussaint as the 'most unhappy' of men, evokes the reader's empathy for Toussaint.
Unlike other poets, Robert Southey for example, who focus heavily on images of torture, or writers like Mary Prince who displace accounts of torture onto other characters, Wordsworth chooses to delete descriptions of torture, and only mentions the 'deep dungeon' Toussaint is kept in, again to protect the sensibilities of his readers.
However, whilst certain features mentioned above suggest Wordsworth's support of slave revolutions, other elements of the sonnet are oppressive.
Other poets, like Cowper, attempted to imitate a creolised slave voice; therefore, the lack of voice in Wordsworth's sonnet is fore grounded resoundingly by its absence.
Toussaint is imprisoned in an 'earless den,' deaf to his complaints.
'Den' is also reminiscent of a foxes 'den' again including Toussaint as part of nature, like an animal incapable of speech.
By denying him a voice Wordsworth others Toussaint.
Indeed, it is Wordsworth's voice that is most prominent with a paternalistic tone.
The break between the sestet and octave construction of the sonnet, places emphasis on Wordsworth's advice to "live and take comfort."
Perhaps, then Wordsworth is ironically addressing not just Toussaint but the entire Haiti nation to wear a 'cheerful brow' in the midst of their enslaving 'bonds.'
It seems the poem is more significant when we analyse issues that are omitted, not included in the sonnet.
There is no mention of religion, blackness and specifically no reference to Toussaint's military success.
Wordsworth kept returning to his sonnet, to alter and adjust.
An edition composed in 1807 exists, in which the original version started line 4 with 'Alone in some deep dungeon' but in the later edition Wordsworth changed it to 'Pillowed in some deep dungeon.'
These stylistic indecisions and hidden tensions mirror the era's undecided opinions concerning the oppression of slaves and the rebellions occurring in the colonies.
In contrast to Wordsworth, Poet Laureate Robert Southey focuses mainly on oppression instead of revolution.
'Poems on the Slave Trade' depicts a slave being tortured, 'exposed' to the 'gorging vulture' as 'living food.'
Southey too employs the trope of the noble savage, repetitively stating that the slave 'groans not' although 'awakened by that fierce sun' which is reminiscent of Phyllis Wheatley's 'A Hymn to Morning' where it is symbolic of white oppression.
Unlike Wordsworth, Southey does discuss notions of religion.
The image of the slave 'hung' on 'high' resembles descriptions of Jesus being crucified on the cross.
Southey quotes the bible, suggesting a day of reckoning will arrive for those who implement such cruel methods of oppression, 'before the Eternal, 'thunder - tongued shall plead against the deep damnation of your deed!''
This teleological approach suggests retribution will finally occur through revolution.
William Cowper's poem 'The Negroes Complaint' featured in his revolutionary work 'The Task' which discussed notions of what it was to be a man.
Edward Said quite rightly states "we must not minimise the shattering importance of that initial insight - peoples being conscious of themselves as prisoners in their own land."
As Toussaint relates in a poem written in captivity, " ce qui est a moi?"
Cowper captures such tensions effectively in his poem.
He questions 'England's rights' to oppress the slave colonies, and repetitively urges them to 'think' and question the reasons for their oppression.
Employing sensibility, he argues 'skins may differ, but affection/Dwells in white and black the same.'
By using nouns of torture, 'sighs,' 'sweat' and 'tears' Cowper appeals further to his reader's sensibilities.
He too employs the tropes of nature and religion to highlight the unnaturalness of a slave trade's actions.
Under the command of the 'one who reigns on high,' 'wild tornadoes' and 'whirlwinds' contest the oppression of the slaves.
Cowper's confessional tone and fluid stylistics inspired Coleridge considerably.
Therefore, it is not surprising that Coleridge's 'Fears in Solitude' is similar in style and content to Cowper's 'A Negroes Complaint.'
Coleridge, like Cowper questions the slave trader's rights to 'fratricide.'
By addressing his readers as 'my brethren' he involves and questions us why we 'poison life's amities' and are able to forget such 'deeds of murder' so easily.
I also believe Coleridge refers to the discrepancies between blacks and whites, through his use of pastoral imagery.
The hills that are 'gay' and 'gorgeous' refer to white societies pride in their control of the colonies, whilst the 'dell/Bathed by mist' symbolises black oppression.
James mentions the notion of 'Negritude' that blacks embraced.
It was a description that encompassed their social and political ideologies, as captured by poet Aime Cesaire in 'cahier d'un retour au pays natal,' "my Negritude is not tower, no cathedral/ it cleaves into the red flesh of the /teeming earth."
Such strong images of independence remove blacks from "being the object of other people's exploitation and ferocity" into " taking action on a grand scale and shaping other people to their own needs."
Perhaps then, Toussaint was embracing and harnessing his Negritude, for an article published in the London Gazette on 12 December 1798 that calls him " a Negro born to vindicate the claims of this species and to show the character of men is independent of exterior colour."
Similarly, a portrait of Toussaint depicts him attired in formal military dress, astride a white horse, pointing towards the future.
This stance is reminiscent of his leadership in the revolutions in Haiti.
However, the image still appears paradoxical, this tension highlights the oppression still in action today, one can only imagine the strength of character needed to challenge such oppression in its original context.
In conclusion, I feel Hegel's master and slave dialectic is crucial when considering the negotiations between oppression and revolution.
As Hegel elaborates "the more perfect the slave...the more enslaved the master becomes.
For the master's identity depends on having a slave who recognises him as master."
Ironically, the master is caught in an "existential impasse"  because the master's identity depends on being recognised by a slavish, unessential consciousness".
"Omnipotent lordship, then, becomes...dependent, static and unessential."
Whereas, "through coerced labour the slave alone...has an interest in changing his condition...only the slave, therefore, has the potentiality for escaping an imbalanced reciprocity and for becoming truly free."
This dialectic relationship of dependence and independence can be applied to Toussaint.
Although imprisoned, he still believed that he had won his cause and that he was a free man, demonstrated when he reminds Napoleon he had been "the first servant of the republic of San Domingo."
Just as the master's position is dependent on the slave's status, so too therefore are the steps towards revolution dependent on methods of oppression.
This text is, as stated, 'Traditional from the Dinka Tribe'; the Dinka Tribe are traditionally a cattle herding tribe from the Sudan region in Africa who take great pride over their cattle and even when dead, do not eat them.
The Dinka, as many other tribes, are inherently expressive and creative with art, music and dances all being part of their lives and their connection to nature.
This text deals with the manifestation of feelings towards the bull and the many connotations the bull has to anyone in the Dinka.
This text appears to be a poem, for several reasons; firstly that, like common in much poetry, the line functions independently of the punctuation, e.g.
, 'White like the shimmering crane bird on the river bank', here the line breaks without instruction to do so by punctuation.
Also the use if poetic devices like simile, which is recurrent through the text, one example of this is in line 9, 'He shines like the morning star.'
Plus rhyme is sometimes used throughout this text both internally , and in the form of a rhyming couplet, .
The first line starts with an emphasis on the personal pronoun 'my', which is immediately associated with possession and relationships.
However, as the line and the stanza develop it becomes clear that the adoration, respect and protection are paramount in the relationship between the Dinka and the bull.
This first section  introduces the relationship between the bull and the Dinka, and gives some insight into the how the Dinka are protected by the bull and rely on the bull , but that the bull is also vulnerable.
The second section breaks into more similes and is primarily concerned with the comparison between the bull and the weather.
It is clear with the use of even more possessive and contextual pronouns like 'his', 'him' and 'he' that the voice in this poem is trying to express, how the bull is changing ; it is even compared to both 'summer and winter' which creates a paradox and would perhaps make the bull sound confusing to someone who doesn't understand it to the same degree as the Dinka.
In this section 'flag' is an important verb used in line 11 because the poem is progressing more to the enemy of the Dinka and the bull, and the flag would assume many connotations with oppressing powers trying to occupy the Dinka's land and the fear this creates.
Therefore, the flag does indeed call 'people from a distance' but it may also be something very dangerous and menacing.
Towards the end of the poem water, care, protection and vulnerability are clearly very important.
The Dinka want to defend something which they care for dearly and have great respect for, but there is also something very tender in the declaration, 'I will water him at the river', creating a mood of natural serenity and celebration that their bull is something glorious and natural compared to the man-made 'well' which will suffice for their enemy.
Throughout the whole of this text it should be remembered that this must be a translation from the Dinka into written English, and the effect that this would have had on the meaning of many of the words.
Plus, the words in this text are mainly monosyllabic and the pace created by this could lead to the assumption that this could be chanted or easily remembered and read aloud to be passed on.
There is great hostility towards the 'enemy' in this piece and perhaps, originally, it could have been intended that this was simultaneously some kind of declaration to protect and defend the bull which they loved and a celebration of the thing most dear to them which gave them back so much.
There is one single voice in this, which is definitely not anonymous and continuously describes the bull and makes it seem very animate and real because of the comparative descriptions and the deeply personal nature throughout.
The organisation of the text is in three clear sections, loosely based around introducing the bull, the complexity and sensitivity of it and the desire to protect and defend it from others.
A: Who do you think is the best musician that ever lived?
B: Jimi Hendrix, without a doubt.
C: Jimi Hendrix?!?!
B: Yeah, just look at him; how he played, wrote, performed.
He was everything, he didn't just play the guitar; he was the guitar.
Every time he performed he was so natural; each chord coursed through his veins.
He gave life to his guitar because it gave life to him.
D: But surely it was all because of drugs?
I mean, he was off his head for most of the time.
It's just like one big acid-trip to me or something.
Everyone harps on about him just because he experimented with music, had scruffy clothes and his hair was a mess; you could say the same about Pete Doherty C: ...now he is the best musician ever!
B: What are you on about?
C: First and foremost, he's a poet like the best of any of the romantics.
He embodies a generation, he is an icon of our time that is going unnoticed and he has passion for music like I've never seen before.
He is an art form in himself, he lives what he writes.
I've seen him on stage, not just on TV and it's something incredible, beautiful and powerful but tragic and vulnerable at the same time.
And I don't care what the newspapers make you think, I'll defend him till the end because he's so much more than anything you'll ever see, if you'd just give him a chance.
Great and Strong does not fit any classical poem's form, like sonnets.
It has no particular rhyming schema, and no regular metric pattern.
However, it is full of sound effects and other stylistic devices conveying unexpected foregrounding.
The poem is composed of three sentences of unequal length: two very short ones of two and three lines, followed by the very long last one - twenty one lines.
However, a decent analyse should not be based on such a division.
Even just a glance at the poem allows to perceive a typographic break in the middle of the poem .
The lines are shorter.
Then, reading the poem  confirms this feeling as the syntax changes; that is why it is interesting to analyse how each part works, starting by the first one.
The beginning of the poem looks like a narration.
It is composed of short clauses built on simple structures such as subject + verb + complement.
There are three occurrences of the structure "he was" + adjective .
This is typical of a narrative description of a character.
The latter is referred to by the personal pronoun "he", and only once by the noun group "this man" .
The reader is not given his name, nor anything about who he is.
But the author chose to provide the reader with other kind of information.
First, let us examine the post-modifying adjectives.
The first ones l.2 repeat the title "great and strong".
It may refer to a biblical episode: Isaiah 27:1 "In that day the LORD with his sore and great and strong sword shall punish leviathan the piercing serpent, even leviathan that crooked serpent."
This intertextual reference already associates him with a killing weapon, although they are positive adjectives at first sight.
Another biblical allusion can be noticed l.4: "and went to wash his hands".
In Matthew 27:24 "When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but that rather a tumult was made, he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person: see ye to it."
Here, the insinuation is even more impressive as it assimilates him to the religious symbol of human evil and suggests the idea of execution and blood.
The vision of blood is predominant through subtle devices such as intertextuality, but also more obviously thanks to the anaphora of the phrase "A little blood"  which is uttered by the character.
Although there is no inverted commas, we know that it is a direct speech thanks to the clause "he said".
The pre-modifying adjective "little" in an other context would tend to attenuate the morbid effect, but here it creates an uncanny irony because it is uttered by that perverse character.
The direct speech is a crucial feature: by giving voice to the persona, the author provides him with the great power of speech - a power that the character fully uses upon "others" .
The importance of speech act and of words has a metatextual function.
The author uses stylistic devices to foreground some aspects of his poem.
For instance, the phonetic effects of sounds are strong.
The sibilant /s/ is dominant in the first lines, especially at the end of words which makes the hissing last: "more or less" , "weakness" .
As the poem goes on, the hissing is getting louder with the voiced sibilants /z/ , giving an feeling of suspense, as if something was going to happen and it was coming closer.
This sensation seems to become real with the /r/ alliteration in different clusters l.9 and 10 .
Something is bound to happen, and the revelation of this "thing" may be found in the analyse of the second part.
The repetition of the same structure from line 14 to line 21 is very striking.
Each line is a post-modifying clause referring to "he" , constructed on the basis: except line 19, which deviates as "Clean" is substituted by "Pure", whose function  and meaning are identical, but it creates a different sound effect, as we shall see later.
Thus, each line is a simile that provides a new facet concerning "this man" , comparing him to various things.
We can apply Short's parallelism rule to analyse these "things" he is compared to: X is a common noun, and its meaning is often linked to the body ; the same lexical field was already present in the first part of the poem .
Y is another common noun  whose meaning refers to death, destruction, homicide.
The similes define him as a murderer in a less subtle and more outstanding way than the allusions found in the first part.
This effect is achieved on one hand thanks to the irony on the association of two words of opposite meaning ; on the other hand, thanks to the phonetic patterns of the passage that we shall describe now.
The /k/ alliteration in the first line of the second part  is very salient as it is on syllable-initial sounds.
This consonance is echoed l.16 and l.19: "Clean as the conscience of a gun", "... of Gen ghis Khan".
Its effect is reinforced since it is a velar plosive, stressed in most occurrences and also because it is the same sound that initiates the word "Clean" which is repeated through this passage.
These cutting sounds can be interpreted as the expression of the destructive violence of that man.
The nasals are also prominent in this passage; there is a lot of /m/ and /n/ in these lines, and some /ŋ/ too: "Clea n as the a nato my of a hye na" .
It is also present in the repeated "Clea n".
Line 19 introduces the bilabial plosive /p/ in a conspicuous manner - "Pure" is foregrounded as it is the only line where "Clean" is replaced by another adjective.
It is echoed in the cluster heard in the sound pair "sperm"/ "spore".
This echo ironically emphasizes the semantic antagonism between the adjective  and the noun it refers to .
Toward the end of the poem, it is worthy to note the shift from /p/ to /b/ alliteration: "bare behind", "bent"/ "bowed".
They are both bilabial plosives but /b/ is voiced whereas /p/ is unvoiced.
Again, the effect is underpinned by the fact that the consonance is on syllable-initials and it is the first sound of the word "blood".
As we said before, the vision of blood is overwhelming in the poem.
This is proved again through the presence of an unusual lexis.
We already noticed the morbid connotation of the words in the Y place: "gun", "slaughter-house", etc.
More arresting is the use of the word "tampons", almost never used in poetry.
The parallelism between l.22 and l.23 enables the reader to link "the tampons" with "all".
The effect would have been attenuated if he had used another word; for example: Using a personal pronoun like "they" would be neutral, with no particular connotation.
But the association of "all" with "tampons" is very meaningful because it reveals the narrator's  aversion towards people's blind acceptance and support for the almighty murderer.
The last aspect that highlights the word "blood" is the typography of the poem.
The penultimate line is composed of only one word "wept", verb whose subject is "a little blood" .
This particular typography represents the image of a tear  falling down, a single word for a single drop , that crushes and spread into three words on the line below "on the ground".
The impact of these last lines is as moving as the whole poem, which can be compared to the persona, for both are powerful and takes the breath away.
Knowledge can be defined and interpreted in a number of ways, the most common assumes it is, 'the information, understanding and skills that you gain through education or experience: practical / medical / scientific knowledge.'
If adopting this definition and relating it to the statement above it is necessary to examine exactly who, during the Renaissance era, would have been accustomed to this kind of Knowledge.
Whether it was gender specific, dependant on status or wealth and in how it was used to shape English Society.
The Renaissance era is one best known for its development and exploration of artistic, cultural and intellectual movement, and though with its roots centred firmly in Italy the influence of the renaissance reached many European countries including Britain.
This was a result achieved partly due to numbers of scholars travelling from England to Italy with the intention of learning Classical literature and teaching.
With the introduction of this 'new knowledge' and European influence, British society began to explore its own culture using the new and different ideas regarding the arts, science and religion.
The need to gain and challenge the ideas that create knowledge has always been fundamental to the way in which a society is able to expand; the old cliché that declares knowledge is power is perhaps at the base of most societies.
It is through Knowledge that economical, political and geographical gain can be achieved, factors perhaps essential to maintain law and order.
The very way in which knowledge itself is valued and perceived reflects the attitudes of those in pursuit of it, it can shape an entire country indicating its possible potential or even lack there of.
Perhaps it is safe to assume that Governments or Commonwealths that have failed or struggled in the past have been based on a false or superficial regard for Knowledge.
That is, it has been applied to a particular set of topics which are accordingly then exposed to a particular category of people.
For example, during the 15 th and 16 th Century Knowledge was considered only to be accessible by the upper class, the nobility.
Wealth and status determined the type of education which was acceptable for an individual to receive; Latin and Greek, along with Mathematics and Astrology were deemed suitable subjects for most scholars.
The perception of Knowledge and the way it can be defined is often restricted and confined to go along with the social norms and expectations.
However surely Knowledge can be discovered, acquired and possessed by anyone and anywhere regardless of their background or social status or wealth.
Knowledge can defy time by being both simultaneously old and new depending on whom it is directed to, its very boundaries are continuously being challenged and explored.
Its fluidity means that it can be manipulated to bring and take advantage in a wide range of situations and the ways in which it can be represented are countless.
In both Utopia, by Sir Thomas More and Beware the Cat, by William Baldwin, Knowledge is represented and used to convey each of the texts main message or even to suggest perhaps the lack of one altogether.
The latter can be more appropriately applied to Baldwin's text.
The representation of Knowledge is conveyed through the various characters which appear in the text, those in positions which assume their hold on Knowledge is secure are often made to look foolish and idiotic, whilst others who the reader would least expect to have any capacity for learning turn out to be the wisest of all.
Baldwin enjoys subverting the norm and continuously challenges the conventions of the church.
Beware the Cat, the first English novel, is every bit as complex as it is a satirical reflection of the time during which Baldwin was writing.
The complexity of the text suggests that the various political and social views that are put across in the text should be taken seriously and would have more than likely provoked a strong reaction from contemporary readers.
However the fact that they are placed deliberately side by side the comic, satiric and the absurd  causes the reader to reassess how genuine these view points are being ascertained.
The text works on a multiple of levels, the first person narrator who not only tells his own story but five other peoples as well, gives the novel apparent depth which is subsequently dismissed with the absurdity of the events which are involved.
Baldwin uses a range of genres and styles; satire, beast fable, dream vision as well as proverb and hymn, all to experiment with the very boundaries of language.
During the novel Baldwin toys with the reader, encouraging a certain reading of the text only to shift his approach to another direction, there is a constant sense of underlying movement and sense of unease for the reader not knowing what is expected of them to gain from the text.
The only guidelines available to the reader are the comments that Baldwin has added through marginal notes, these enables Baldwin to both maintain his distance as the writer and also to guide the readers response, emphasising significant points in the text.
These notes often occur next to some statement or declaration from Master Streamer, the designated narrator.
As mentioned earlier Streamer is an example of one of those in a position which would demand a great knowledge and understanding of life based on a sound education and intellect, he is a Divine meaning a lecturer of theology.
However Baldwin is very quick to alter this perception or assumption and regularly seeks to undermine and point out the ridiculous nature of the narration.
For example before the story even can begin, Streamer dedicates his introduction to the explanation and history behind the names of; Aldersgatae, Moorgate, Ludgate, Aldgate and Cripplegate.
This is a wholly uncalled for, irrelevant digression that serves the reader with nothing but the impression that Streamer's character cannot be taken seriously, which is precisely what Baldwin intended.
Baldwin ensures that each time Streamer parades his clear lack of knowledge, the reader is made to more than acknowledge its presence.
In the third part of the oration, Streamer declares, He completely disregards the work of those belonging to precious generations and continues to state, Baldwin also uses Streamers character as an object for humour and satire, again reinforcing his foolish nature and reassuring the reader that he is there for their amusement and of course as the narrator.
It is during this narration that Streamer, after finishing his typically extravagant description of the process of his potion making, he goes on to narrate its result, Throughout this excessive collection of rhyming couplets Baldwin merely adds a short and concise marginal note, 'Here the poetic fury came upon him'.
The contrast between the lengths is quite striking, clearly few words are need for Baldwin to identify the unintentional comical side of Streamers oration.
Master Streamer however, is not the only one which Baldwin uses in this way, much of his satire is directed at Religious figures, especially priests which feature regularly throughout the text.
By undermining them, it is possible to see that Baldwin represents knowledge by showing those who lack it and making them appear foolish.
This is apparent in the case of the Priest who tries to vanquish the devil, who is infact mistaken for Mouse Slayer, the cat, The idea that each of the Priests holy items, intended for good, actually result in causing harm is a significant idea, it perhaps reveals Baldwin's own perception of the incapability and the inept quality of this Religious doctrine, as well as the tradition and convention that belong to it.
The Priest himself is found next, in an entirely un-holy and considerably compromising position, '...his face lay upon a boy's bare arse. '
Though Baldwin often challenges the conventional representation of Knowledge in this way, he also manages to represent it through the role of the cats.
The cats themselves often seem to have some kind of secret knowledge that places them at some advantage, at a superior position to humans.
This is mainly shown through the story of Mouse Slayer and the types of humans she encounters, the old woman for instance, who keeps a brothel, is described as, 'very holy and religious.'
Mouse Slayer seems to judge each of her owners with a kind of moral knowledge based on the cat law, which unlike human law is obeyed loyally, 'I never disobeyed or transgressed out holy law'.
Despite even when it is oppressive and degrading towards female cats which forbids them to, 'refuse any males not exceeding the number of ten in one night.'
This perhaps suggests that despite Mouse Slayer having knowledge to judge, it does not earn her any equality amongst the males.
The fact that the law is considered holy as well also adds to the idea that these cats have more respect for their Governing body.
Not only do they have a Government which appears to enforce their laws, but there is also a distinctive hierarchy among them.
Streamer hears the cats use titles such as, 'Lord' and, 'Chief Councillor' as well as, 'Assistant'.
Indeed, Baldwin applies many humanistic qualities to the cats and it is apparent that their society is meant to be compared to human society.
Beware the Cat is on the whole a clearly satirical novel of English Government, its justice system, and also of the Church, representing the knowledge which lies behind these institutions.
In this way there is a considerable difference between Beware the Cat and Thomas More's, Utopia.
More's main motivation and message lacks the humour and mocking tone that Baldwin adopts, instead opting for a far more grounded and critical evaluation of British society and culture.
It is an exposure of the corrupt condition of the English state.
However both texts share the same association of Knowledge through the language of Latin.
Associating Knowledge with Latin was very common during the Renaissance, it was the essential language to learn for scholars, or individuals who wished to improve their social status.
Streamer uses Latin in his narration to appear knowledgeable but does so incorrectly and out of context, therefore once more looking like the fool.
Baldwin is reinforcing that knowledge is often misused by those who don't understand it.
More originally wrote Utopia entirely in Latin; it wasn't until 1851 that it was translated into English.
This perhaps is why Utopia appears quite a direct and simplistic text with the structure of a compare and contrast technique, using one idealistic fantasy setting against the back drop of reality.
In regards to the representation of Knowledge, Utopia is based on it its discovery.
More introduces the character, Raphael Hythloday, the imaginary traveller, to take the reader to the imaginary world of Utopia.
Hythloday is an explorer and his entire purpose is to travel in the hope of discovering these new worlds and the knowledge they contain.
This is perhaps reflective of what was actually happening in Britain during the tine of writing, and what Andrew Hadfield calls, 'early modern English travel and colonial writing.'
During the time of publication, Britain was undergoing a period of, 'serious interest in colonial expansion.'.
Therefore Hadfield draws the conclusion that the Utopians are in fact another version of the English who have to deal with the exact same problems that feature in the reality.
Through Hythloday's discoveries, there is a sense of uncovering a new Knowledge, he tells the fictional More and the reader that this can be used to deepen and extend an individuals knowledge even further.
However whereas More believes that this Knowledge should be used to Council and advise those who have the power to change and influence legislation, Hythloday strongly disagrees which in turn provokes a mild argument with neither of the parties accepting the others view when it concludes.
Though Hythloday feels it is necessary for him to pass on his discovery of Utopia and the Utopian knowledge and culture, He does not wish to indulge those who would not listen to him.
He perceives the Courts as constructed of sycophants and flatterers, Again, whilst telling More about his meeting with the Cardinal and his advisors, he recalls how they would only approve of his ideas when the Cardinal had voiced his opinion, Reinforcing the idea that Knowledge can only gain its credibility once it has been passed from someone with status or influence, its value can only be ascertained once the status of its speaker is known.
On the opposite side to Hythloday, More is quite clearly in favour of using knowledge to advise and council.
This is perhaps not surprising as More, the author, did in fact become a councillor at the court of Henry VIII, so would naturally have had a more accurate perception of how the courts worked.
The More in the text tries to encourage Hythloday, After more of less agreeing to disagree Hythloday moves on to give a greatly detailed description of Utopia, its history and culture.
In Utopia knowledge is regarded rather highly in fact it is considered one of the highest pleasures for the mind, 'In intellectual pursuits they are tireless. '
Education is clearly an essential part of their society, they ensure that every child, 'man and woman alike'  receive a good introduction to literature and spend their leisure time reading.
However though the Society of Utopia appears to be based on equality, there is no class system as such, everyone is treated the same, infact this is almost to the point where there is a danger of losing identity or individuality, it is very clear that there is still a division between those who have practical knowledge and those who have intellectual knowledge.
For example if a craftsmen or labourer, The use of, 'relieved' and, 'promoted' is quite significant, it suggests that the manual work is a chore or burden which can only be relieved entering into a far more superior and worthier class of intellectuals.
Knowledge here is being represented as something which is only valuable or worthy when it is based on scholarly level and not a manual or practical one.
Again though there appears to be no class division, this is not entirely accurate, similarly, the reader learns that men and women are equals with equal educational opportunities, yet toward the end of the text a strong image of a woman being a figure of negative, corruptible influence is identified.
Hythloday personifies Pride as a woman, To conclude both More and Baldwin have carefully constructed their texts on the basis to influence or provoke a response from their readers which aligned to their own.
This is not in the least unique or exclusive to Renaissance texts in particular, but is found in almost every literary work.
However, what defines them as individual is the way in which the represent knowledge to reinforce, emphasise or articulate a view point or character/stereotype, which in turn is praised or undermined.
Knowledge can be represented in vast number of ways, and this is what is found amongst Baldwin and Moore's texts.
It is clear that these authors were aware of how knowledge can be valued and credited on a number of factors.
Its whole credibility and validity is dependant on who is using it.
Knowledge, it seems, is at the basis of inequality in these texts and even during the Renaissance era and beyond.
It was dependant on class and specific to gender, it was confined to the upper, wealthier social elite and excluded from the lower class masses who were obviously deemed unsuitable or unworthy to be exposed to any level of intellectual education.
The Renaissance was certainly a time for knowledge, if knowledge can be restricted to time that is.
There were colonial expansions, discoveries of new lands, new people and inevitably new knowledge.
It was a time of development and a chance to challenge old conventions and traditions, breaking away from ancestral knowledge and striking out into the unknown.
It is this picture, this representation of knowledge that can be found at the foundation of Renaissance literature.
The Renaissance period saw a significant change in the way in which people viewed themselves.
An increase in focus upon the individual generated various perspectives on the 'self', both public and private.
The period also witnessed key developments in literature.
Writers developed "new genres to fashion a self, to describe other persons, or to present a personal vision of the world...
The works produced are often intimate and personal but at the same time serve political and public purposes."
There are several areas in which to explore this often conflicting interplay between the public and private 'self', namely love and social manipulation.
This essay will explore both the contextual background of the development of such ideas and how they were constructed in literature of the time Humanism was a movement that lay at the heart of the fifteenth century Renaissance in Italy.
Italian humanists believed that God had given man a central position in the Universe, and that man could freely decide to degenerate into the innately brutish or aggressive character of man as described by Thomas Hobbes, who regarded a man's life to be essentially "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short."
This belief was dominant throughout the medieval period and encouraged people to believe that whatever their situation was at birth, it could not be changed.
However, Humanist readings of Plato and Homer generated the belief that man could choose himself to be, or do good, or to be bad, or evil; humans were not governed by destiny or absolute values, but could determine their own fate.
Education was essential in man's pursuit to better himself.
Humanists designed new, much broader curriculums, and the Renaissance saw an increase in the amount of schools.
This is particularly evident in England in the development of grammar schools across the country.
In Marlowe's drama Doctor Faustus, the protagonist, Faustus embodies all the characteristics of an educated Renaissance man.
In his first speech he illustrates his extensive reading and knowledge in logic, physics, law and theology.
He also embodies the art of rhetoric within his speeches throughout the play, a literary technique used greatly by other writers of the period such as Thomas Wyatt and Erasmus a key figure in the development of the 'private' self.
It is an important observation that it was during the Renaissance that the use of the word 'self' as a prefix first arises.
Through the rise of humanism and focus on the individual, the 'self' becomes something that can be regulated, enjoyed, but more importantly something that needs to be examined and constructed.
The way in which people sought to better themselves individually essentially resulted in a more 'public' sense of image.
The art of 'self-fashioning' becomes central to the nature of the Renaissance court; men were 'self-made' and 'self - serving'.
Renaissance men and women began to socialise more freely, and more frequently, in order to promote themselves within various social circles.
In "The Courtier" Castiglione personified the idealistic view of a courtier, or Renaissance man, who should display a high degree of Sprezzatura.
In the Elizabethan court it was the warrior and prolific writer Sir Philip Sidney that embodied this to perfection.
J.F.R.
Day writes that "Sidney's remarkable writings - Astrophil and Stella, Arcadia, A Defence of Poesy - were...circulated in manuscript as was customary for Elizabethan aristocrats exhibiting their literary sprezzatura."
This was also true of Sir Thomas Wyatt, who wrote under Henry VIII, but who lacked Sidney's social extravagance.
Buxton wrote of Sidney that "He seemed to his contemporaries to exhibit to perfection those qualities which went to make up the ideal courtier of Castiglione's description, which they wished to emulate..." However, such public virtue was not always entirely honest, nor natural.
Through humanistic beliefs and ideas of Sprezzatura, the art of social mobility became deceitfully constructed and there was a clear element of hypocrisy.
The individual consciousness of the public 'self' meant one could manipulate situations in order to benefit oneself through the 'putting on' of different various faces in order to please varying audiences.
This generated a strong sense of distrust and unease within the court.
It might be argued that to an extent such activities and feelings contributed to the development of literary Machiavellian characters.
In Marlowe's Doctor Faustus it might be plausible to argue that the character of Mephastophilis illustrates this manipulative nature of the Renaissance court through the way in which he uses multiple-forms in order to pursue his own interest.
A key example of this is his first appearance.
In order to secure the entrapment of Faustus, he complies with the protagonist's command for him to appear as a Franciscan friar.
Indeed, Mephastophilis is a very interesting and complex character, who discourages Faustus from pursuing the route to damnation when he tells him that he would rather be in heaven: Marlowe utilises this intimate scene between Mephastophilis and Faustus, set within the small interior of Faustus's study in such a way that the text is able to comment upon more public issues of contemporary society.
This was a technique used by many writers of the Renaissance who frequently accommodated "a new focus on real people and the actual contemporary world."
Marlowe continues to play with this notion of self-fashioning at the end of scene four.
Fautus's servant Wagner offers to "teach thee [the clown] to turn thyself to anything."
The clown's reply subtly infers the fickleness of the court: "No, no sir, if you turn me into anything, let it be in the likeness of a little pretty frisking flea, that I may be here, and there an everywhere!"
In The Duchess of Malfi John Webster's character Bosola also embodies these sel-serving characteristics.
However, Bosola's character is far more complex than perhaps that of Mephastophilis; Webster uses this character as a construct to explore and illustrate new contemporary ideas about conscience.
Bosola is regarded as the "court gall" who will "rail at things which he wants" and will do anything in order to fulfil his desires.
His nature is well illustrated in his soliloquies, a dramatic technique which became very popular during the Renaissance, since they allowed the audience an unmediated access to a character's inner, private thoughts.
It was an opportunity for writers to reveal the true 'self' of a key character and illustrate character development.
Bosola's complex character is revealed to the audience through the use of this technique to great effect.
Despite Bosola's initial portrayal as an 'evil' character, it is possible to read him as a construct or vehicle within the play, used by Webster to exploit the "price for private security amid court splendour, and also the psychology of a spy."
Bosola's public  actions are arguably bourn from a need to survive.
M.C.
Bradbrook comments upon "Bosola's insecurity, his bitter jesting and self-mockery, his constant, unremitting demands for "reward,"which is always denied him, and finally his love of disguises as a mode of psychological relief."
Webster uses Bosola to illustrate the dark, private and cruel "side of political power"; his decision to become an 'invisible devil in flesh' and commit the evils "the ill man can invent" essentially leads to his destruction.
Bosola's soliloquies illustrate a conflict of conscience, and though we may perceive a total change of heart at the end of act four, it is more likely that his conscience overrides his private desire for survival and he manipulates his public 'self' in an attempt to rectify the evils he has committed.
Sidney's work Astrophil and Stella clearly illustrates further this conflict between public virtue and private desire.
Of Sidney himself, Day writes: "Sidney's obsequies primarily were meant to honour a man who epitomized the best that aristocracy could produce, an aristocracy which theoretically rooted its privileges in virtue and was still keenly aware of its role in society at large."
In Sonnet 47, Sidney suggests that privately Astrophil desires only for Stella through lust.
In private he admits to himself that he does not love her, but "that eye, / Doth make my heart give my tongue to the lie."
He continues to express his false love to appear virtuous in public, but also to secure the fulfilment of his sexual desires.
Sidney utilises the sonnet form in order to express Astrophil's inner thoughts and desires.
This format became largely popular during the Renaissance period due to its capacity for exploring the dimensions of the 'self' and illustrating the inner thought processes of an individual.
Furthermore it allowed the writer to make some form of public or political comment.
Marlowe referred to the sonnets as "infinite riches in a little room".
The form attempts to represent the self that lies beneath public self-fashioning, asserting a dimension of interiority.
It was largely used during the period to express the frustrations of unrequited love; the deformed 'self' through desire; and aspirations of divine love.
In the first sonnet of Sidney's work he writes: "Look into the heart and write".
This, in essence, expresses fully the intent of the sonnet form to exploit the spiritual, 'private' workings of the 'self'.
The use of small spaces in literature is evident on different levels, graphologically as in the sonnet form, metaphysically through the use of short spaces of time and in drama, physically.
Patricia Fumerton writes that "The history of the Elizabethan self...was a history of fragmentation in which the subject lived in public view but always withheld for itself a 'secret 'room".
In Doctor Faustus, the action is focused in the very intimate arena of Faustus's study; only here can he practice the art of magic out of view from those who admire him.
This 'private' arena is in great contrast to the way in which Faustus's tragic end is exposed in a very 'public' fashion in front of the play's audience, which in essence is what, it might be argued, makes it so dramatic.
Webster uses the effect of small, intimate spaces to great dramatic effect in his tragedy The Duchess of Malfi, a play riddled with secrets and deceit.
Many of the most poignant and significant scenes of the play take place within the Duchess's chamber.
Webster uses these scenes to create a paradox around which the play revolves.
The Duchess, despite partaking in intimate scenes and relationships, both romancantic and dramatic  within the chamber, is constantly haunted by her public role and duty as Duchess.
In Act One scene three, she justifies her proposal to Antonio and expresses her private torment caused essentially by her public role: In her final scene in Act four she questions Bosola, "Who am I?...
Am not I thy duchess?"
In spite of her attempt to assert the power of her position when she states, "I am Duchess of Malfi still", Webster's use of the intimate setting enforces that indeed she is trapped, like "a lark in a cage".
Peter Washington examines this conflict between the Duchess's private and public 'self'; the "gap between the way in which the heroine perceives herself and the ways in which others see her.
To Antonio she is a chaste saint, to her brothers a potential whore, to herself simply a woman who wishes to fulfil her natural desires."
It is possible explore further Webster's dramatisation of the public and private 'self' through the nature of the Duchess's tragedy and questioning whether it is the person or the role of the Duchess we see suffer.
Washington argues that in fact it is the latter, "a stripping away of attributes gathered together under the Duchess's name."
He contxtualises his argument suggesting that her title has little significance prior to the "reality of death".
Indeed, throughout the play, despite her own private statements of authority, her public 'self' appears to have very little control and thus her character seems more confined to her private persona.
It is only in her tragic death scene and throughout the act following her death that her public position seems to have any real effect.
This, Washington argues, is "a sententious conclusion characteristic of Jacobean tragedy's obsession with theme of momento mori.
She affirms her [public] identity in the process of losing it."
'Emma' was written in 1816 by Jane Austen and is an example of a 'domestic novel'.
It is so called because it is a story about the domesticity of life and the subtleties of interactions within a household.
The novel form itself is a highly structured art form which became significant as a literary form during the 18 th century.
It coincided with the rise of industrialism and capitalism and also a higher appreciation of the importance of the individual.
The novel form reflected this new found awareness and readers began to interpret meanings in the stories.
The novel has a set of narrative procedures which are instantly recognisable and these procedures create a regulated structure for the novel which does not exist so strongly in other literary forms, such as the play.
The genre of the play is naturally a freer form, with more scope for expression and interpretation as there is not such a strict structure.
An actor portraying a character can choose to interpret a character in a number of ways, whereas characters in a novel are more regulated by structure and form.
Time is dealt with differently in the two forms.
It is more regulated in the novel as it has to comply with strict narrative procedures.
In 'The Winter's Tale' written by Shakespeare in 1611, time is personified and influences the story more obviously.
In 'Emma', time manipulates and guides the life of the protagonist and the story in a structural way.
It is a more subtle influence although it is very precisely dealt with.
The story itself is set within the narrow time frame of one year and is chronological in its events which ground it in realism.
The reader is 'subjected', almost, to this tight structure where events are manipulated by the influence of time.
This has an effect on other areas of the novel in that everything is detailed and precise, including the weather and seasons, as well as the present and past histories of the characters.
In 'The Winter's Tale' there is not this intimate knowledge of the characters.
There are many questions that remain unanswered, for instance, where do Leonte's accusations of Hermione's supposed infidelity arise from?
What is his reasoning behind it?
From the very beginning we see that this is a play of mystery and ambiguity.
This adds to the fairytale aspect of the story, as the ambiguity is evident in the characters as well as in time.
Realism is not priority in this play, as opposed to 'Emma', where realism in both time and setting is imperative.
The setting of Hartfield reflects the highly structured nature of the novel, as it is an organised and conventional, where there is very little change or discord.
As we are told straight away, Emma 'had lived nearly twenty-one years in the world with very little to distress or vex her' {chapter one}.
Hartfield, and in particular Emma's father, Mr Woodhouse, have a grounding effect on the story as they represent routine.
The character of Mr Woodhouse in particular hates any upset or changes in his usual pattern.
Time is so neatly and tightly controlled that anything out of the ordinary or any impulsive actions disturb the equilibrium of Emma's world.
For instance, it is the characters of Frank Churchill, Jane Fairfax and Mrs Elton that help move the story onwards by their presence because they challenge Emma and her situation.
Without these characters, there could not be progress, as they provide the circumstances for Emma to realise that she loves Mr Knightley.
Mr Knightley is a grounding influence on Emma because he characterises age and wisdom.
There is an age gap of sixteen years between the two characters; he signifies the sensitivity and discretion of maturity, whilst Emma represents the vivacity and playfulness of youth.
Together they create a successful partnership, signifying that age and youth can complement each other.
This portrays another aspect of the multifaceted nature of time as a guiding influence in the novel.
The character of Frank Churchill challenges the conventionality of time in 'Emma'.
The very fact that he arrives into the story late means that Emma is immediately vexed because he upsets her plans.
He is also an impulsive character, as can be seen when he leaves for London at short notice merely for a haircut.
Emma reflects that 'it did not accord with the rationality of plan'.
The act seems to Emma as irrational and illogical.
Everything for Emma is planned and organised and when something does not agree with these plans, there is immediate discord.
Anything out of place, even time, is worrying for her.
For instance, in chapter 25 when Emma is considering going to the Coles' party, the thought of her father staying up late makes her uneasy: Time in 'Emma' plays a much different role than in 'The Winter's Tale'.
The precise nature of time reflects the aspect of society which Austen was portraying in the 18th century.
A realistic approach to time is therefore needed for the topic to be considered accurately.
Sir Walter Scott said of Jane Austen that she 'knows intimately and observes precisely' social situations in the early 1800s'.
The author focussed on nuances of society and behaviour in society as well aspects of public and private lives, and therefore needed to apply a structured time frame in order to show the subtleties of interactions and shifts in behaviour accurately.
In 'The Winter's Tale' there is more of a freedom of expression of time and space.
An ambiguous and unrealistic view of time and place lends itself well to the fairytale nature of the story.
Time plays much more of a role in the telling of the story, whereas in 'Emma' it guides and manipulates the telling of the story.
As Keith Sagar states, Time in 'The Winter's Tale' plays a number of roles and is not merely a plot device to move forward the story by sixteen years: 'Time the Destroyer  turns his hourglass and becomes Time the Revealer, the Healer, the Restorer and the Begetter '.
'The Winter's Tale' is an unusual play due to the fact that it cannot be easily categorised into any particular form of play.
Many of Shakespeare's plays can be simplistically identified as either tragedies or comedies.
Tragedies are of a tragic nature - usually with one or more deaths.
'Romeo and Juliet' is an example of a tragedy.
Whilst a comedy is not often overtly funny, it usually has a happy ending involving marriage or reunion.
'As You Like It' is an example of a comedy.
'The Winter's Tale' however has both tragic and comic elements.
Time plays an important role in distinguishing whether the play ends comically or tragically.
In some of Shakespeare's plays where there are both comic and tragic elements, there can often be one line which can signal the difference between the play ending happily or otherwise.
In 'Much Ado About Nothing' it is the line uttered by Beatrice; 'Kill Claudio' which almost leads to tragic consequences.
In 'The Winter's Tale', it is the famous stage direction 'Exit, pursued by a bear' which switches the play from a tragedy to a comedy.
At the start of Act IV, however, the entrance of Time also signals a visible shift in mood.
From this moment onwards there are comic elements which hint at a happy finale.
We are introduced to Polyxenes' son, Florizel and also a grown Perdita suggesting a possible union.
There is also comic dialogue between a Shepherd and his son.
In all literary forms, time is an important device in exploring the themes of life.
Time is a topic which has fascinated philosophers, writers and artists, as well as the public, for centuries.
A good example of how time is ubiquitous is Andrew Marvell's poem 'To His Coy Mistress'.
Time is triumphant in every aspect of life, although it is portrayed differently in certain circumstances and different literary forms.
It is a structural device in 'Emma' which enhances the regimented nature of the novel and is used to highlight Austen's observations of the subtleties of society.
In 'The Winter's Tale' time is undetermined.
The play is not concerned with realism as it runs along the classic fairytale arrangement of 'once upon a time...' The personification of time therefore complements this form because sixteen years need to pass in order for the story and the situation to right itself.
Time becomes a healer.
Although the play is not based in realism, we, as an audience accept it, because with drama we suspend our usual boundaries of realism.
Time becomes the narrator whilst assuring us that there will be a happy finale, therefore bringing together the play as a whole.
Time in both texts helps the author to explore themes which affect everyday life.
Austen explores more precise themes of behaviour and society, whilst Shakespeare explores the grander themes of life - love and death.
Time is the guiding force for the telling and exploration of these themes, whilst remaining an ever-influential backdrop to the characters' lives and our perception of them.
Wilmot's 'Upon his Leaving his Mistress' and Armitage's '[I am very bothered when I think]' seemingly both portray differing viewpoints with regard to relationships and love and the various implications of these notions.
Indeed, at times similar linguistic devices are employed by the poets, yet they are utilised in different ways in order to create rather quite unique effects.
Armitage's poem takes the form of a sonnet, which is immediately indicative of love, yet the way in which the poem is written is certainly far from the traditional sonnets of Shakespeare and such like, and lacks the romantic aspect of the traditional verse.
Instead, Armitage's poem is rife with colloquial language at its simplicity from the very beginning with 'I am very bothered when I think', not to mention several monosyllabic and polysyllabic words as opposed to the longer more extravagant expressions which one would expect to find in a sonnet.
The only deviation from the simplicity of Armitage's language is in line eight, where he declares: 'O the unrivalled stench of branded skin;' his use of hyperbole creates a stark contrast with the clear-cut diction of the rest of the poem, however it could be interpreted as sarcasm, as in fact, so could the first line.
In effect, Armitage's general divergence from the conventional form emulates the atypical way in which he sought to win the affection of the girl he was in love with at the tender age of thirteen; this coupled with the simple language mimics the inability of a child at this age to display their affections appropriately as well as dealing with such emotions.
After all, it is symptomatic of a child to often be nasty to someone that they admire.
On the other hand, Wilmot's poem incorporates a regular rhyme scheme, iambic tetrameter and masculine rhyme.
Effectively, the use of these poetical features makes Wilmot's poem more regular in the traditional sense, yet like Armitage, his subject matter isn't necessarily reflective of the general consensus nor traditional.
Seemingly, Wilmot is an exponent of the debauched lifestyle with regard to relationships, demonstrated firstly by the clear distinction he makes between himself and his mistress, Wilmot's gulf between himself and his mistress reveals a lack of commitment; in addition, he seems to make a further distinction between his mistress and other women, deeming them 'meaner spirits of your sex.'
His somewhat mocking reference towards 'meaner spirits of your sex'-  which is enhanced through the alliteration of the 's' consonant - serves to validate Wilmot's view that it is better to enjoy oneself rather than seek fidelity within a relationship.
This mockery of women who are not adulterous, who instead of "dispensing favours" remain loyal is further reiterated by the sarcastic way in which Wilmot utters how they  'Contrive to make one happy Man.'
The italicisation of 'one' coupled with the above illustrates quite clearly how Wilmot looks down upon committed relationships and is perhaps an advocate of free love.
Again, as with Armitage, Wilmot's poem reflects an air of sarcasm thus making them similar in this respect.
Armitage, as already mentioned, keeps the language in his poem simple and diverges from the use of elaborate diction; in fact, he uses no similes or metaphors, but instead seems to rely upon tapping into the reader's senses, through the use of tactile, visual and auditory imagery.
For example, the visual imagery of 'the naked flame of the Bunsen burner' perhaps evokes feelings of fear due to the fact that the flame is 'naked' and therefore untamed and potentially dangerous.
On a different note, 'flame' could be a reference to his love for the girl and the way in which it burns brightly; when considered within a lexical set consisting of 'flame,' 'branded,' 'rings,' 'eternity,' and  'marry me,' this becomes more evident and although Armitage's poem isn't necessarily conventional, inadvertently, his commitment is unmistakable through his reference to nouns and adjectives that suggest infinity.
It is here that we see a clear distinction between the commitment evident in Armitage's poem - albeit demonstrated in a peculiar fashion - and the lack of commitment expressed in Wilmot's poem.
Furthermore, tactile imagery such as the image of her slipping her 'thumb and middle finger in' and 'branded skin' are again quite powerful, as well as the auditory imagery of calling upon her name.
Armitage's sensory imagery seems to replace any complex poetic language and is effective due to the fact that it is in keeping with the simplicity of the poem as a whole.
Armitage's simplicity couldn't be further from Wilmot's perhaps superfluous diction; however this isn't to suggest that Wilmot's poem is a normal love poem at all.
His references to 'Joy,' 'happy' and  'willing' demonstrate a hedonistic facet, thus reflecting the subject matter of the poem, that being that one should not 'be confin'd' and as already mentioned, advocates a sense of free love; the juxtaposition of fidelity and Wilmot's opinion of the merits of infidelity further reiterates this.
As already mentioned, Wilmot's poem benefits from an identifiable structure, incorporating rhyme and thus rhythm; effectively this gives the poem an air of jauntiness which is parallel to the approach Wilmot seems to be taking with regard to love and sex, where one should not be confined and restricted but free and hedonistic.
The lines of each stanza are insured to follow the tetrameter of the poem given that Wilmot uses elision to shorten longer words, such as 'em'all.'
This is somewhat similar to Armitage's colloquial language, yet unlike Armitage, the majority of Wilmot's poem consists of more opulent language on the whole.
Unlike Armitage, Wilmot does use more linguistic devices, such as the personification of the Earth's 'willing Womb,' which also incorporates alliteration.
Furthermore, Wilmot uses simile to describe the 'Favours, like Nature' that the Mistress bestows.
Again, this echoes the idea of liberated love due to the reference to nature and the connotations that such an allusion would evoke.
In fact, this image of nature is extended due to the lexical cluster relating to the 'Seed-receiving Earth,' 'Grain,' 'Show'rs,' 'Womb, and  'Mankind.'
All of these references are natural, especially the Earth, seeds and grain; this simply serves to further reiterate the notion of free and liberated love for the pleasure of mankind, and how Wilmot sees it as natural.
Although both Armitage and Wilmot share similarities, a comparison of their poems seems to serve the purpose of intensifying the effects of the other and makes evident the lucid difference between their views.
In fact, the ending of both poems bears witness to this.
The finality of Wilmot's last few lines comes to a clear conclusion in that his mistress should be the 'Mistress of Mankind,' in answer to his own question; Armitage on the other hand creates a slightly ambiguous ending where we are unsure whether he wants to be believed or not as he revisits the possible idea of sarcasm already witnessed earlier in his poem.
'The Kaleidoscope' and 'On Re-Recording Mozart' are instantly comparable in that they deal with the subjects of death and bereavement.
In terms of metre and rhyme, the Dunn poem adheres to certain rules of its genre, which I will be exploring shortly.
However, the poem by Susan Wicks is a clear example of free verse.
This form of poetry is written in continuous prose but finds structure in the organisation of line breaks and breaks in syntax.
This form does not have a set rhyme or metre, and is naturally a looser, more flexible form as a result.
Both poems are examples of the sonnet design.
A traditional sonnet is a form of 'love' poetry, although this is not the only subject that can lend itself to the form .
Sonnets are generally written in fourteen lines and with a regular metre of iambic pentameter.
There are various different forms of the sonnet, which alter the structure as well as rhyme scheme.
For instance, the English sonnet is divided into 3 quatrains  and one rhyming couplet to conclude.
The Italian sonnet, however, is split into one octave and the concluding argument  is within the last six lines, or sestet.
The Dunn poem is an example of the English sonnet, and adheres to the basic structure of this form of poetry.
The Susan Wicks poem, however, does not conform to the strict metre of iambic pentameter due to the free verse model.
The metre instead is anapaestic for the first few feet of line1, ending with an iamb in order to place stress on 'drove': From this point onwards, the poem alternates between metre schemes ranging between some iambic feet, anapaestic and dactylic.
The anapaestic metre in the first few feet lends a strong sense of movement to the poem, a steady beat, much like the docking of the tape alluded to in line six, or the throb of car wheels driving on an unsteady road.
The subject of loss is dealt with in the Wicks poem by trying to re-live a memory of a loved-one through music.
The initial bereavement is felt in the two quatrains at the beginning of the poem.
There is an emphasis on silence as the rhythm from the car and the clicking tape  are the only things that can be heard.
The plosive sounds of 't', 'k' 'd' adds to this effect.
This poem is an Italian form of sonnet and the volta comes through in the last six lines with the re-living of the memory of the lost one through the music on the tape: The Douglas Dunn poem, however, is an English sonnet form in that the turn takes place in the last two lines in the poem, forming a rhyming couplet.
In the previous 12 lines, the sense of grief felt by presumably the poet, can be an all-encompassing emotion.
The iambic pentameter offers a sense of gravity to the poem.
The rising second syllable in the iambic foot also creates a sense of climbing, as the poet literally climbs the stairs expecting to see his loved-one at the top.
The excess or 'kaleidoscope' of commodities - 'tray', 'pillow', 'gowns' and 'frocks' - in the first four lines contrasts sharply the sense of loss and emptiness later in the poem.
Instead, the poet's grief becomes everything: He is offering himself, almost as a sacrifice or a demonstration of his desperation in wanting his wife back.
The use of punctuation and anaphora  here foregrounds each word so that the reader is forced to consider the painful subject which the poet is addressing and the feeling of powerlessness in it's entirety - in his entire body.
This feeling of paralysis through mourning can also be read in the Wicks poem with the use of enjambment after the first and third stanzas.
The first stanza which ends with 'love' is structurally separated from the resulting part of the line - '...and love/itself were cut out' - so that the physical splitting of the stanza after the fourth line reflects the poet's feelings of being cut away from her beloved.
The enjambment between stanzas three and four reflects the volta in the argument.
The reader and the poet are beginning to find some relief from this almost deafening silence found in the two quatrains.
We are literally pulled forwards from line 11-12 across the divide - '...
Her breath/pulls me across darkness' as the poet is pulled from despair by the memory of her loved-one evoked by the music.
The use of assonance and long consonant sounds, for instance 's' and 'n', emphasises the steady and smooth running of the tape as it plays anew and therefore the relief the poet feels from the silence and grief as she has metaphorically 'erased death'.
The two poems deal with a tragic subject in different, but equally effective ways, both using the sonnet form capably.
The Dunn poem is the more structurally accurate when looking at this form.
The sonnet is an elegy for his wife, and his consequent devastation at her death.
The unexplainable nature of death is foregrounded in the last couplet, leaving the reader with an impression of the poet's helplessness.
The Wicks poem, in the basic sonnet form of fourteen lines, shows how something as simple as a piece of music can evoke strong memories of a person, such that it can be an alleviation from intense feelings of loss and emptiness.
Susan Wicks herself observed, 'poetry itself requires us to remain essentially vulnerable.'.
The irregular rhythm shows this vulnerability by creating a sense of passing time but with a lack of recognition to it.
The lack of a consistent composition in the free verse structure in turn foregrounds the uncontrollable and unimaginable nature of death.
Dragonwyck is a classical Gothic film of the 1940s.
Its narrative structure and visual style correspond with the characteristics of classical cinema.
In this essay I will carry out a close textual analysis of the ball scene in Joseph L. Mankiewicz's film in relation to the theory of mise-en-scène and its adherence to the techniques of narration in Classical Hollywood Cinema.
The Van Ryn's celebrate a ball at Dragonwyck castle.
Miranda is trying to fit in with everybody, she joins a group of young women to befriend them and blend in.
However, they despise her for her roots and Miranda is left hurt and humiliated.
Nicholas, who has witnessed the argument, comforts Miranda and invites her to dance.
Classical Hollywood Cinema has a linear narrative structure which holds to the pattern: equilibrium-disequilibrium-new equilibrium.
Sequences and scenes are generally moulded like the whole film; this order is evident in the film Dragonwyck and also in this particular scene.
The scene begins with Miranda walking through the ballroom observing what is around her and trying to find her place.
After a brief encounter with a French man, Miranda advances into an adjacent room and sits with the young women there.
Their conversation starts amicably but the women's superior attitude belittles and insults Miranda.
The new equilibrium is reached when Nicholas comforts Miranda and flatters her, telling her how "beautiful" she looks and how she is so "much better" than the other girls, and finally dancing with her.
Nicholas solves the situation and restores the equilibrium.
This scene respects classical narrative conventions and, furthermore, epitomises the linear narrative structure of Classical Hollywood Cinema.
The different parts of the narrative pattern can be clearly identified and differentiated.
The two protagonists of Dragonwyck are present during this scene and the main features of their personalities conveyed.
The growing relationship between Miranda and Nicholas is apparent and the protagonists' interaction, and other characters' reactions, predicts their future.
The way in which Nicholas saves Miranda and cheers her up proves his role as the Gothic male.
His bold and domineering qualities stand out as he talks to Miranda and dances with her in front of the whole room.
Miranda is the heroine in Dragonwyck and is portrayed as young and innocent in this scene.
Miranda's naivety takes her to sit with the group of women believing she can engage in casual conversation with them, she talks about Connecticut and tries to fit in but ends up hurt because she is not good enough.
The way in which she withdraws proves her childishness as she storms out raising her voice.
She is anxious to hear Nicholas say she looks beautiful and forces him to say so, this infantile behaviour matches her personality and role as a Gothic heroine.
There is always an antagonist who opposes the protagonists.
In this specific scene, the antagonists would be the women who despise Miranda.
They laugh at her humble origins and gossip while she dances with Nicholas at the end of the scene.
The narrative structure in classical Hollywood cinema follows a cause-effect chain of events which can be applied to this scene as follows: Miranda lives at Dragonwyck and likes dancing, consequently, she attends the ball.
Miranda wants to fit in at the dance therefore, she talks to the group of women but, the women are posh and Miranda is not, so they are rude to her.
As Miranda is hurt, she runs away.
Nicholas sees the incident and comes after her; he likes Miranda and wants to comfort her hence, he invites her to dance.
Miranda accepts his offer because she is attracted to him.
In classical Hollywood cinema, the chain of events stems from the protagonist's actions and the protagonist's desire precipitates the story.
This does not translate perfectly to Dragonwyck as Nicholas' desire for an heir stirs the story rather than solely Miranda.
In this scene, however, the events are triggered by Miranda's desire to belong in Dragonwyck and her actions throughout the scene.
The combination of unrestricted and subjective narration can be appreciated in this scene.
The spectator accompanies Miranda and experiences the events from her point of view sharing her judgment, such as when she walks into the room to sit with the other women.
Even though there are no point of view shots, the spectator sees the group of girls just after Miranda looks out of the frame in the previous shot, therefore, the spectator is inclined to identify with the heroine.
The film also makes use of unrestricted narration with the effect of causing suspense and dramatic irony.
The spectator sees Nicholas observing Miranda from behind the door but she does not know that Nicholas is watching her , therefore, the audience can expect Nicholas to go after Miranda when she leaves.
When the couple is outside, Nicholas asks Miranda if she is enjoying the ball, the spectator knows Nicholas' question is only strategic as he has been observing her.
The use of unrestricted narration in this scene creates suspense, while the spectator waits to see how Nicholas approaches Miranda, and also dramatic irony as Miranda appreciates Nicholas' empathy and care without being aware of him having seen everything.
The use of shot-countershot makes this happen as the spectator sees what the protagonists see and also receives the extra information to move up in the hierarchy of knowledge.
This scene also fulfils another characteristic of Classical Hollywood Cinema, it has a strong sense of closure.
The new equilibrium the narrative reaches when Nicholas consoles Miranda, seals the scene and wraps up the story for the spectator.
The fade out emphasises the closure and aids the transition to the next scene which contrasts with this optimistic ending.
Classical Hollywood Cinema attempts to create a realistic sensation in its films.
There is a natural flow and pace as events take place in this scene of Dragonwyck.
The continuity editing system classical films put in practice serves to keep this genuineness through its unobtrusive way of joining the action.
I will study the scene's visual style to explore how the technical elements are applied to this effect.
The scene opens with an establishing shot of the ballroom and people dancing to situate the spectator .
Then the film moves on to the protagonist, the camera tracks Miranda's movement to the two-shot with the French man.
After their short conversation, the shot is not cut immediately as the spectator sees Miranda walk away.
This grants realism because she moves naturally from one place to another; it gives the film continuity and also a sense of space.
Tracking builds on the natural flow of the action such as when the protagonist moves away from the housekeeper and the camera pursues her as she goes outside.
This movement is also symbolic now that it emphasises that Miranda is turning away from the ball and the people.
The abundant use of tracking helps maintain the pace, the characters set the rhythm and the camera complies with their actions.
This use of the camera adds to the subjective narration of the scene.
When Nicholas and Miranda are outside, she turns away from Nicholas at a certain point and Nicholas moves towards her.
The shot is not cut, the camera follows their motions providing the action with continuity.
When they start dancing to go back inside the camera imitates their movements and seems to be dancing with them, therefore, it acquires the tempo and gestures of the characters .
When Miranda finally stands up at the end of the altercation with the young women, the camera tilts up with her movement.
This subjective shot stresses the fact that Miranda is leading the action.
Match on action is used throughout the scene to ensure a fluid rhythm.
In the shot with the French man, the spectator has seen Miranda move out of the frame and then re-enter again smoothly.
When the heroine leaves the room with the women, match on action leads on to the next shot once again where the housekeeper talks to Miranda; this gives the sensation that the spectator is trailing Miranda in real time .
Towards the end of the scene when Miranda and Nicholas are dancing, the couple enters the ballroom and the shots from the outside and the inside are linked to maintain the natural progression of the scene.
A variety of shots is used in this scene.
Alternating wide and medium shots drives the spectator to focus on different aspects or situations.
When Miranda steps into the room with the women, a medium shot obliges the spectator to focus on her expression and see how something attracts her attention.
A wide shot of the three women sitting and talking conveys what Miranda was looking at and where she is making her way to.
During their argument, a medium close-up of Miranda makes the spectator focus on her expression as she gets angrier.
The camera also zooms out to offer a wide shot of the four women, this serves to show how Miranda is surrounded and cornered by the others .
When Miranda suddenly gets up, a wide shot of the room lets the spectator see that the other people in the room are aware of her raising her voice to the women .
A series of shots shows the other people reacting to Miranda and Nicholas dancing together as they waltz into the ballroom.
Before returning to a medium shot of the couple to hear them talking in a smaller frame, a tracking of one of the guests leads the camera to a medium shot of Johanna so that the spectator sees her reaction in particular, concerned by seeing her husband with their daughter's companion.
The use of shot/countershot and the respect of the eye line match, shows the interaction between characters when Miranda speaks with the other women.
It is relevant to highlight the medium shot of Nicholas behind the door which permits the spectator see him looking at Miranda.
He is also looking down, hence abiding by the eye line match.
This keeps the continuity of the scene and the realism as the shots match the natural conversation.
On the other hand, the use of two-shot also stands out in this scene.
When Miranda is outside, a wide shot lets the spectator see Nicholas arrive.
This shot places the protagonists in context for the spectator and then passes to a more intimate two-shot .
This smaller frame permits the action to only focus on the couple and the attraction between them.
Using a two-shot instead of shot/countershot as the characters talk stresses the fact that they are physically close, the couple is not separated.
A still camera can also create important effects.
At the end of this scene as Miranda and Nicholas are dancing among the crowd, the camera stays still and sees them dance away, this shows how they are getting lost in the crowd and forgetting about everyone else.
The first aspect of mise-en-scène to take into account is the setting.
The establishing shot previously mentioned introduces the location of the scene.
The spectator recognises the room as Dragonwyck, the two wide shots offer different perspectives of the room and the decorations change its appearance, the place looks fancy and pompous.
The fact that everyone is dancing and that there is an orchestra obviously places the spectator at one of the balls Nicholas mentions earlier in the film.
The setting changes when Miranda walks outside.
This setting acquires a symbolic significance, the change emphasises that Miranda and Nicholas are alone, together, and detached from everyone else.
The different shot sizes varies what is stressed in each frame, the wide shots want the spectator to focus on the surroundings and the atmosphere while the smaller frames want the spectator to centre on the characters, therefore, the performances.
The last shots of the scene are symbolically charged as the spectator watches Nicholas and Miranda waltz into the ballroom and metaphorically push away all the other characters.
The housekeeper descends the stairs, stunned at the sight of the couple, and they just dance in front of her and she walks away.
Two of the girls who had insulted Miranda, are shocked by the couple and run to gossip with the other.
The couple swiftly dances their way, free from the observers' disapproving stares.
Costume and make-up play an important part in this scene as it depicts a dance at Dragonwyck.
The costumes the spectator sees in the first shot help situate the action as they hint to a special event.
Miranda's costume is important as she is has dressed up for the occasion.
The heroine has changed her dull, plain clothes for a fashionable and showy gown.
The colour of her dress is also important now that she is wearing white, symbolising innocence and virtue.
When Miranda sits with the other women, the spectator appreciates she looks just like the others.
They all share the same kind of dress and hairstyle.
Miranda is trying to fit in, wearing the correct clothes to match the occasion, but she still does not feel comfortable and is not accepted by the guests.
An important prop in this scene is the fan Miranda is carrying.
The other women also have fans, this again stresses the fact Miranda has the same attire as the others.
In the first shot of Miranda in this scene, the manner in which she clutches the fan displays her nerves.
Miranda is fiddling with it and cannot conceal her anxiety.
Later on when she flees from the young women in the room, Miranda exits fanning herself .
With this action, she conveys her exasperation and indignation as well as her pride.
During the conversation with the girls, Miranda opens and closes the fan various times, this gives away her nervousness.
The lighting adds a lot to the interpretation of this scene.
Three-point lighting is the characteristic style of lighting used in classical cinema.
Its presence in this scene is appreciated as Miranda is perfectly illuminated to look glamorous and so emphasise the fact that she has dressed up for the ball.
As Miranda is on her way outside, the housekeeper stops her.
There is an evident change in lighting at this moment, the darkness symbolises her sadness.
Her features and dress are no longer highlighted.
The shadows which cover her as she makes her way to the terrace seem to be hiding her .
These contrasts also add realism to the scene to imitate the outdoors light at that time of day.
When Nicholas is with her, the lighting highlights the difference between the couple now that the heroine, as opposed to Nicholas, is brightly illuminated.
Performance is an essential element of mise-en-scène to study during this scene.
The first shot of Miranda in this scene reveals her to be insecure and overwhelmed by the ball as she is looking around and moving shyly .
When the French man addresses her, she is happy to learn he knows who she is although her inexistent knowledge of French causes her to turn away and feel out of place.
Miranda does not understand what the other guests are telling the man and she looks bewildered.
The lady who takes the French man away from Miranda does not even look at her but rudely interrupts their conversation.
This confirms how Miranda is not accepted or respected by the other guests, which links on to her conversation with the young women.
Miranda politely asks the girls if she can join them, she is trying to sound posh and fit in.
Her tone of voice, however, changes as the women attack her.
The spectator can identify the pride in her voice and her indignation at the girls' attitude.
She finally raises her voice in anger, picks up her dress, opens her fan and quits the room.
Her performance shows how she wants to be as good as the others and not lose her composure though her actions prove her to be naive.
As regards the three women, their voices fade out when they see her arrive.
Their sense of superiority resonates through their performance.
The pauses and tone of voice indicate how they despise the protagonist, for example, their surprise to learn that Miranda's father is a farmer.
Nicholas is smiling, therefore, he is glad Miranda is fitting in and talking to people.
Nicholas is serious and direct when he talks to Miranda outside which matches his personality.
Miranda looks at him in admiration and is excited to hear him say how beautiful she looks.
Miranda forces him to say so, in a childish manner, but Nicholas complacently does so.
She is anxious and unburdens herself talking to him.
She turns her back on Nicholas, again, uncovering her nerves.
Their performances display their mutual affection which culminates in the dance.
Nicholas and Miranda look at each intensely and their short dialogue clearly manifesting their happiness.
The end of the scene also permits the spectator to value how other characters react to the couple dancing.
The guests gossip, move away and point at the couple expressing shock and surprise .
The shot of Johanna, on the other hand, simply transmits sadness as she looks at them and sighs.
Performance is the last element of mise-en-scène, as no motifs stand out in this scene, however, it is important to not overlook the use of sound.
The ball music accompanies the scene as is expected of a dance scene, nonetheless, there is a change of music while Nicholas and Miranda are talking which is significant.
The ball music fades out to a slower more dramatic music which matches the action as Miranda is telling Nicholas how she feels.
The ball music returns when Nicholas is about to ask Miranda to dance with him, this complements the tone of the scene as it is livelier and more romantic.
This scene from Dragonwyck adheres to the visual style and narration of classic Hollywood cinema.
The film effectively uses mise-en-scène to enrich the narration of the scene, and also, the spectator's understanding and interpretation of the characters and events.
Close observation of the different elements of mise-en-scène, the narrative structure and the visual style offers valuable information to, and swiftly guides, the spectator through the scene.
The shots are elegantly sewn together through invisible editing and this combination of elements proves the scene to be a worthy example of classic Hollywood cinema.
Bram Stoker's Dracula, upon first impressions, seems to comply with this view.
Mina Harker embodies all the good womanly virtues, while Lucy Westenra is a voluptuous blood-lusting animal.
However, upon closer inspection, Dracula's representation of female sexuality seems to become blurred and the boundaries between gender roles fluctuate.
Lucy, though vivacious, is well respected and virginal when we are first introduced to her.
She transforms from angel to beast in just a few paragraphs.
Mina, although an ideal wife for Jonathan Harker, is portrayed as engaging with modern technologies, making her resourceful yet unconventional.
Many critics, therefore, have formed the view that Stoker's representations of female sexuality is inconclusive.
The question is, why?
According to Carol Senf, Stoker's treatment stems from his "ambivalent reaction to a topical phenomenon - the New Woman."
The New Woman emerged as a topic of controversy around 1894.
She challenged the Victorian norms, encouraging women to search for freedom from domesticity.
Some women advocated ambitions beyond motherhood and the right to sexual freedom and information about contraception and venereal diseases.
Many represented the New Woman negatively, believing that they were threatening society and challenging gender roles.
Stoker seems to agree.
The first women who appear in the novel are the female vampires who attract and repulse Jonathan Harker.
The women appear to Harker at first as beautiful and "voluptuous," but he is soon shocked as they reveal their animalistic tendencies.
Harker becomes passive, allowing the female vampires to articulate the gender reversals which seemed so threatening at the time.
Further on in the chapter, Harker hears a "low wail, as of a half smothered child," and realises that the vampires are feeding on a baby.
They are the perverse versions of the New Woman, portraying the anxiety that maternity was at stake.
Indeed, the female vampires seem to embody fears about the New Woman.
But was this Stoker's main aim?
Gender reversal is a common theme throughout the book, one we can also see in Dracula's quest to claim not only the women in the novel, but the men also.
Some critics see only Dracula's goal to possess and repress the female characters.
Bram Dijkstra explains why: Is Dijkstra underestimating Stoker's abilities to veil homosexual intentions?
Dracula scorns the female vampires when he finds them seducing Harker and cries out, "his man belongs to me!"
Dracula utters a similar phrase towards the end of the novel, when he is taunting the Crew of Light.
"Your girls that you all love are mine already; and through them you and others shall yet be mine."
This suggests that Dracula's ultimate desire is to possess the men, who in turn make it easier for Dracula to access them, by pumping Lucy full of their blood.
She receives four blood transfusions, where the blood of the males are in effect mixed together.
Lucy is already more receptive to Dracula's bite as she is sexual and vivacious so the men's blood will eventually filter through Dracula's veins.
This questions the function of female sexuality in the novel.
Do females act as mere vessels to hold the blood of men which will eventually be sucked from her?
Like the female vampires, Lucy also portrays attributes of the New Woman.
Though she is presented as a lady, well respected and esteemed, she still adopts attitudes which connect her to the New Woman.
These desires imply that Lucy wants to break from convention and challenge her social role.
Even Lucy admits that "this is heresy."
Searching for new, decadent experiences, Lucy "bears the stamp of the degenerative New Woman."
Lucy's polyandrous desire to marry all three suitors degenerates her to an animal, a blood-sucking vampire.
She is therefore a threat to society.
And the only way to eliminate that threat is to destroy it.
Thus we witness the scene of Lucy's ultimate destruction by the men.
Many critics agree that this scene portrays sexual violence.
It seems that Stoker is explicitly exhibiting his hatred towards the New Woman who needs to be destroyed and eradicated from society.
The fact that the violence is particularly sexual may be a response to Jack the Ripper who was causing much disturbance at the time.
The Ripper murders aimed to cleanse the streets of prostitution and the consequences of prostitution - syphilis.
The physical change in Lucy's appearance as she gradually changes from an angel to a vampire could be analogous to the changes one suffers when contaminated with sexual diseases.
"The physical transformations suffered by the innocent victims in the novel suggest the dangers of syphilis."
Venereal diseases threatened to degenerate society, and female sexuality was seen as a prime cause.
Around the time of publication, misogynistic attitudes were rife.
The physician, Nicholas Francis Cooke stated that women "do not shrink from the most atrocious crimes .
.
.Women are more merciless, more bloodthirsty than men."
This view is clearly depicted in Stoker's representation of Lucy and the female vampires.
Van Helsing convinces the men that reversing gender roles is evil and even Arthur almost succumbs to the New Woman's kiss.
The scene of Lucy's destruction allows the men to correct the initial penetration and gender reversal.
The woman is made passive again.
They are punishing Lucy for being over-sexed, for hungering for sex rather than maternity.
We see this in the way she flings the child to the floor in order to kiss her potential husband.
This battle between good and evil becomes a battle to restore Lucy to purity and sweetness.
The decapitation of Lucy also impacts on the concept of motherhood, acting as a "fantastic but futile hope that maternity and sexuality be divorced."
The "Bloofer Lady" portrays the confusion of gender roles.
Lucy preys on young children and treats the child she brings back with her with nothing that resembles motherly love or affection.
Prioritising sex over maternity was seen as an attribute of the New Woman.
However, many of the New Woman writers at the time would have been offended by Stoker's representation of Lucy.
Sarah Grand, one of the first New Woman writers, in fact stated that it was a woman's job to be patient and nurturing.
However, perhaps Stoker was not totally oblivious to these appeals.
For Mina Harker is the true maternal Victorian woman, helping and comforting the men in the novel.
But doesn't she, also, inhabit certain attributes of the New Woman?
Critics agree that Mina represents the intellectual New Woman.
She is thoroughly modern, using technological advancements to integrate herself in a society full of men.
She wants to master the art of shorthand and she learns the train timetables off by heart.
However, these virtues are merely for the good of her husband.
Stoker seems to condone certain New Woman attributes as long as a woman is contained within marriage.
The difference between Mina and Lucy is their reaction to Dracula.
While Lucy succumbs easily, Mina is filled with horror when she recounts her ordeal with Dracula.
"Unclean, unclean!"
she exclaims.
Mina's refusal of the count and her disgust and repulsion towards him allows her to retain her purity Van Helsing praises Mina's character.
"She is one of God's own woman, fashioned by his own hand.
.
.
So sweet, so true, so noble."
Helsing is articulating the common prejudices of the Victorian era.
Indeed, Mina is a faithful wife to her husband and she exhibit's a desire to nurture and comfort the men in the novel.
But at the same time, she is resourceful and independent.
According to Elaine Showalter, this makes Mina a "dangerous hybrid."
Because she is domesticated to a certain extent, the men in the novel can partially control her.
As the search for the count intensifies, Van Helsing decides it is time to exclude Mina from the plans to destroy Dracula, in order to protect her well-being which would ultimately have effects on her maternity.
But the New Woman in Mina cannot accept being silenced.
She begins to have troubled dreams, she feels anxious and depressed and the lack of confidence given by the men makes her hysterical.
Is Stoker portraying the confusing, ever changing attitude of female sexuality, which so caused misogynistic views?
Cooke also stated that women were "inconstant and changeable."
Something in Mina is attracting punishment of some sort as she is eventually subjected to Dracula's bite.
Interestingly, by excluding Mina, the men have indirectly allowed Dracula to claim her.
Like Lucy, Dracula is using Mina's mind and body to access the men in the novel.
He can read her thoughts and vice versa.
"When my brain says 'come!'
you shall cross land or sea to do my bidding."
Again, we ask whether Dracula's use of Mina is merely to possess the men.
Taken as a whole, Dracula seems to represent Lucy as representing the fears of the New Woman, while Mina depicts normality reinstated.
Little Quincey, a confirmation that Mina's maternity was protected, represents the "natural order and rectification of conventional gender roles."
It seems that the vicious battle between good and evil hinges on female sexuality.
The restless frustration to capture and destroy Dracula seems to depict the same desire to repress and control women of the era who were increasingly becoming more independent and lacking traditional Victorian virtues.
However, Mina Harker does in fact embody many modern traits as a woman.
Perhaps, according to Carol Senf, Stoker was trying to suggest that modern women could "combine the best of the traditional and the new."
His general representation of female sexuality, therefore, remains decidedly ambivalent.
It cannot go unnoticed, however, that Dracula is possibly trying to hide homosexual desires.
One may ask what the females in the novel have to do with this.
This ideology is evident in Dracula when considering certain scenes.
Dracula decides he wants Harker for himself only once he has seen his vampire daughters try to seduce him.
Dracula sucks Lucy's blood which in fact has been mingled with the men's blood, following several blood transfusions.
And finally, Dracula uses Mina as the surest means to get to the Crew of Light.
Are the female characters merely a thin veil to hide the undertones of homosexuality in Dracula?
If so the novel is possibly suggesting that female sexuality is the ultimate downfall and degeneration of men.
The poem, or song, concerns a Lady's indecision about whom she will choose, Alexis or Damon.
The poem is written mainly in iambic tetrameter, though there are some inverted feet which stop the poem falling into monotony.
An example is the spondee in 'How strongly...', which starts the poem.
The stress on the questioning word emphasises the fact that it is a dilemma; the writer is asking us a question.
Later in the poem, 'Cure then...' also has two stresses, this makes it sound more like a command than a request and the reader is encouraged by the punctuation to pause after this, which makes it more prominent.
The obvious advantage of the metre is that English speech is usually in iambs, so the metre does lend itself to be sung, although the use of masculine rhymes stops the tone becoming too whimsical and draws our attention to the dilemma at hand.
On line six of each stanza there is an extra iambic foot which has the effect of slowing down the speech of the reader and forces them to further contemplate the last few words of each verse.
This is especially effective in the second stanza, where we pronounce the words 'languish', 'sigh', and 'die' more slowly than the others; it feels almost like a heavy sigh of indecision in itself.
The word 'die', indicates strong heartfelt feelings and brings a a more serious tone to the poem, along with the use of the word 'blood', which makes us think of the colour red, the colour of passion.
It links us back to the first line where we are asked the question 'How strongly does my passion flow...'.
Of course passion, an emotion, cannot be said to physically flow but we traditionally link passion and strong feelings with blood, as it is innate and these feelings, like our blood, cannot be changed.
The reader imagines passion coursing through the veins and the 'restless fever' indicates action not passivity.
We are left with the feeling that this is not girlish indecision, but fierce love for both parties and a true predicament for the woman concerned.
Sibilance is used in the second stanza; the name Alexis lends itself to this.
Sibilance in 'Alexis present is...' and 'Alexis I do miss...' makes the reader pronounce speak softly at these points.
This contrasts with the plosive consonance of 'pow'rful prove' and the commanding tone of the third stanza.
The effect of all this is to reflect the ups and downs of argument and indecision.
The poem is not commanding the whole way through, and neither is it soft and quiet.
The fluctuation in tone caused by the use of both soft and forceful rhyme emulates the way the poem goes back and forth between Damon and Alexis.
The conclusion of the poem bears no answers, in fact we look to Cupid to make the decision which is evidently too much for the writer.
The poem ends on 'I am lost.'
which offers no inkling as to which man has been favoured.
Montaigne's final sentence to his short preface, 'To the Reader', reveals the aims of the writer in completing his essays and the subject he is intending to focus upon; himself.
However, even though the Essays are based on one 'everyman character', Montaigne invites the reader to contemplate, through this single man's experiences and thoughts, their own views and morals.
He attempts, as the word 'assay' suggests, to 'hunt for truth, personality and a knowledge of humanity through an exploration of his own reaction to his... experiences'.
This relates to the constant theme running throughout his 'unconventional biography', which is that of 'the self'.
Expectations are therefore set up for the reader immediately, in the sense that many major themes seen throughout the Essays are introduced in this preface, as it is brimming with the suggestion of many significant ideas and topics.
Montaigne's chapters 'On repenting' of Book III and 'On liars' of Book I are it seems greatly significant in the light of the preface 'To the Reader', as many ideas explored in these essays, relate back to this unique introduction.
These themes, often interwoven with each other, include truth and lies, the 'Nature' of individuals and the 'native' being, repentance, as previously mentioned the theme of 'the self' and many more minor topics.
Each one is in need of study for the importance of the preface for our appreciation of these chosen chapters to become clear.
In the preface, Montaigne sets up an inviting, humorous and 'trusting' ambiance through the use of a colloquial style and ironic tone: This ironic but typically good-humoured statement by Montaigne almost acts as an escape to criticism as it is a form of warning to the reader that they may not appreciate his 'attempts'.
Simultaneously it cleverly intrigues the reader and entices them to read on.
Montaigne often uses this 'self-depreciating' tone, such as in the opening of 'On repenting': This characteristic tone seems to represent Montaigne's feelings on the 'limited scope' of his attempts.
This illustrates the idea of the preface hinting to the reader the content and style of the Essays to follow.
Montaigne makes a reference to another culture in 'To the Reader' to emphasise his point by using a rather shocking and powerful image for the reader: In doing so, the writer wants to stress his disclosure and bare truth.
The use of examples, anecdotes and fictional characters is an important part to Montaigne's Essays and can be found throughout his work, more specifically in both chapters, 'On repenting' and 'On liars'.
They act to support Montaigne's ideas and theories and they also convey the humanist writer's extended knowledge and wider reading.
Montaigne often juxtaposes classical references with 'earthy anecdotes' as can be seen in the chapter 'On repenting' in which he writes of the story from his own experience of a 'peasant' 'born to beggary' who 'became a thief' which is immediately followed by information of 'Pythagorean' philosophy: These 'historical examples of behaviour  followed by pithy reflections on the human condition ', were a 'ready-made format for books'.
Montaigne claimed that he owned around 1000 volumes in his own private library, which can clearly be seen through his familiarity with literature from 'antiquity' and his continuous references to such philosophers and important theorists as Plutarch, Aristotle, Socrates and many others, expressed throughout the Essays.
The 'Nature' of man is an idea Montaigne often refers back to as can be observed in both the chosen chapters of study.
Again however, the reader is introduced to the idea in the preface, as are so many other themes.
Montaigne had 'unbounded approval and trust' in 'Nature' and believed humans had a 'native form' which they should not stray from.
In 'To the Reader', Montaigne tells the reader how they 'will read of my defects and native form'.
To follow a natural path in life is how it should be in Montaigne's eyes.
In the chapter 'On liars', he writes of how a 'natural defect' should not be seen as a 'deliberate one' and this 'misfortune' should not create 'malice which is the enemy of my natural humour'.
He also personifies 'Nature' later on in the chapter and also in the preface, to emphasise 'her' importance and value in his own mind: The reader is made aware very early on therefore; of the importance of following one's own natural form and being content with the life 'Nature has put into our hands' and not 'striving' to be something one is not.
In 'On repenting', Montaigne uses the word 'Nature' and its derivatives extremely often and has a large section of the chapter centred on this important theme.
Montaigne states: Once again it is obvious to note Montaigne's beliefs and ideas when it comes to 'Nature' and how the preface leads us, the reader, onto exploring this major theme.
Studying the chapter 'On repenting' specifically, the idea of repentance links to the on-running theme of 'Nature' as well and to the way in which Montaigne feels people should act: It is clear that the writer, who 'rarely repents', does not think just because of natural defects one should have to repent and feel bad as if the character flaw, were a 'sin'.
This is an example of the preface subtly setting up links to the previously mentioned themes.
The reader, throughout the essays and certainly in the two chosen chapters, makes a mental link back to the preface as ideas are aroused once again in the text following 'To the Reader'.
Truth, lies and trust are all related topics, which can be found in the two studied chapters and also elsewhere in the book, the ideas once again introduced in the preface 'To the Reader', emphasising their importance it seems: Montaigne talks directly to the reader and creates trust with them, as he invites them into his personal 'private family' life creating the feeling of privilege and inclusion.
Montaigne 'prefers forthright speech' as he believes one therefore cannot hide the truth.
This is perhaps the main reason for his style and language to represent that of an 'ordinary' man.
His direct, unaffected and natural style of writing was common practice in the sixteenth century as writers wanted to create the impression of effortless work.
He states in the preface that he plans to present himself in a 'simple, natural and everyday fashion' without 'artifice'.
He explores this idea more fully in the significant chapter 'On repenting': One can be deceitful and hide their true self.
As mentioned in the preface, Montaigne 'wants to be seen... without striving', so clearly is against such 'deliberate' deception and does not agree with the gap between appearance and reality.
In the recently mentioned chapter, 'On repenting' Montaigne expresses his approval of showing your true self 'in your own home', 'there is no striving there, no artifice'.
Clearly truth and deceit are major concerns in the chapter aptly named 'On liars'.
Montaigne also extends the idea of 'lies' and more fully exploring all areas of this 'accursed vice', the writer links the act of lying with a strong 'memory': This claim enhances the reader's trust in Montaigne as he goes on to describe his own 'grotesquely faulty' memory.
He also blames a good memory for being the cause of unnecessary 'chatter' as 'it is easier to draw on the storehouse of memory than to find something original to say'.
The use of an extended metaphor of a 'silly horse' is at work to relay Montaigne's point more effectively: Another notable point is that in the preface, as said before, Montaigne compares himself to a 'native' who appears 'wholly naked'.
This enhances the put-forward idea of his disclosure and full openness to the reader creating a stronger bond between reader and writer.
Therefore, as can be observed, the preface sets up the basis for the exploration of lies and deceit in the direct sense but furthermore evokes a feeling of trust from the reader.
Now we must look at the final and most obvious theme of the Essays, that of 'the Self'.
Montaigne's stated reason for writing his Essays was to explore his own being.
'No one in Classical Antiquity had done anything like it'.
Aristotle taught Montaigne that 'individual persons... have a specific human soul' that could 'vary in quality but not in nature'.
Therefore, in studying himself he was in fact, under the teachings of the great philosopher, studying man's 'nature' in general.
Montaigne clearly states in 'To the reader' that he wishes to explore himself and sets 'no other end' but to write about the single subject of the book, 'himself'.
Montaigne did assays' of himself by himself."
However, through reading about the experiences of this single man, the reader is invited to find relations between the writer and their own 'natures' and to consider wider issues about 'man' in general.
Aristotle teaches: Many scholars believed, 'You can attach the whole of moral philosophy to a commonplace private life just as to one of richer stuff'.
In the earlier chapter of study, the phrase 'experience has often shown me that' exemplifies the idea that in discussing oneself an observation on the general nature of mankind can be made.
Digression in later chapters was more common as Montaigne became more confident with detailing his own personal views and opinions.
The contrast of the two chapters 'On liars' of Book I and 'On repenting' of Book III concerning the habit of digressing is apparent and supports this idea.
'On liars' is basically strict to the point but does discuss subsidiary themes from this major one such as 'memory'.
However, in the later chapter he does not strictly focus on 'repenting' but drifts off the subject and explores man's 'nature' in general and 'old age'.
This digression perhaps signifies the inconclusiveness of such a vast subject, which is not helped by the ever-changing nature of humans.
Montaigne states in the opening of 'On repenting', 'I am unable to stabilize my subject'.
The human 'portrait' does 'vary' making a conclusion 'impossible' to 'grasp'.
As the years passed the nature of the Essays became increasingly personal.
Self-portraiture became more important as can be seen in the difference between the A, B and C passages.
C passages, the text of 1592, were much more personal than the earlier A passages, the text of 1580.
However, critics believed even in the 1580 passages Montaigne's 'self' shines through.
Returning to Montaigne's tendency to digress, in the chapter 'On repenting', one can see in this later chapter the more personal and free-flowing quality of the writing.
As can be seen, the preface, 'To the Reader', sets up expectations for the reader and introduces them to the important themes explored throughout the Essays and more specifically in the chosen chapters of study.
In hindsight, one can observe the subtle links the preface makes with what is to follow and therefore adds to our own appreciation of the essays being studied, which conveys the importance of this unusual introduction.
Both of the explored chapters 'On liars' and 'On repenting' concern most of the themes dealt with in the preface, therefore we, the reader, can value the ideas more as we have been introduced to them at an earlier stage.
The preface almost acts as a simple guide or outline to the Essays and helps the reader's mind focus on the ideas Montaigne believes are most important.
Montaigne also does not stray from what he promises the reader he will do in the preface about his set wish to explore himself.
However, he does obviously digress and discusses related themes and ideas mainly dealing with the nature of man in relation to his own thoughts and 'experiences'.
Due to the conversational and trusting style used by Montaigne so early on as in the preface, the reader is more inclined to agree with his own personal beliefs, as the relationship between reader and writer is immediately fairly strong.
After reading the preface therefore, whilst studying the Essays, we refer back to the introduction and perhaps it influences our own appreciation of themes dealt with later on.
Are we subconsciously influenced in making up our own minds due to the innocuous style and apparent friendliness of 'To the Reader'?
When comparing the two poems "Her First Week" and "The Spirit is too Blunt an Instrument", it becomes clear that although both deal with a description of a baby and thus have the same topic in general, many differences can be found when analysing them in detail.
These differences are reflected in the use of pronouns, in the lexis and in the grammatical structure of the poems, and thus this essay is going to draw a comparison between the two poems by focusing on the above mentioned aspects.
Visually, the overall structure of the two poems is very similar.
Both contain almost the same number of lines , whereas the latter is further subdivided into three different stanzas of nine lines each.
The lines neither rhyme nor is there a regular rhythmic pattern which may be due to the fact that the number of syllables in each line varies very much.
Thus, both poems contain lines with relatively few syllables  or even only three in poem D ) and also very long lines with up to 15 syllables.
.
What is also similar is that both poems have a lot of enjambments as the sentences are very complex and go on in the next line most of the time.
In contrast to the quite similar visual pattern, the use of pronouns is very different in the two poems.
Whereas in "Her First Week" over 30 pronouns are used, the pronoun "her" being the predominant one as it occurs 18 times throughout the whole poem, there are only three pronouns in "The Spirit is too Blunt an Instrument".
Already the first word in the heading of "Her First Week" is a pronoun and the reader or the audience automatically ask the question to whom this pronoun may relate.
But instead of providing them with an answer by referring to a proper noun  or a common noun  in the first sentence of the poem, two new pronouns occur there: she and I.
Thus, it can be guessed that the poem deals with at least two people and it furthermore becomes clear that it is told out of the perspective of one of them as there seems to be an I-narrator or a first person point of view.
Although neither in the first sentence nor in the whole poem the word "baby" comes up, the context makes clear that the pronouns "her" and "she" must refer to a baby.
In the first sentence for example, the adjective "small" complements the pronoun "she" and combined with the words "first week" and "crib" an indirect reference to a baby is established.
Furthermore the "her" in the second line is post-modified by three appositions that describe the baby´s exact position in the crib  and the source it might have come from.  )
Contrary to this detailed description of the baby, the "I" in the poem is not further specified.
From the first sentence, it becomes clear that it must be an older person as he/she "scan[s] the crib".
But neither the age, nor the gender or the relation to the baby  can be determined, because the referential noun for the pronoun is missing.
Only the role, the taking care of the baby, is described in further detail in the following lines which shows that the role of the person is more important than his/her identity.
Finally, the identity of the "I" is given away in the final lines of the poem by the expression "when I fed her [...] and offered the breast, greyish-white, and struck with minuscule scars like creeks in sunlight".
Here, the "I" is gendered female with the help of the phrase "to offer the breast".
The breast is the noun head and the following adjective "greyish-white" together with the coordinate clause introduced by the connector "and" form the post-modifier of the head.
They provide the information about the person´s age as the greyish-white colour and the wrinkles which are circumscribed with a comparison allude to the fact that the person must be quite old and thus is probably the mother or grandmother of the baby.
In contrast to this extensive use of pronouns in "Her First Week", there are only three pronouns in "The Spirit is too Blunt an Instrument" and each time they are near to their referential nouns.
Thus, the "their" in line 6 refers back to the "blind bones", the "its" in line 12 refers back to the "ear" two words before and the "their" in "their pain" in line 27 has even three referential nouns which are connected by "and" in "love and despair and anxiety".
This last pronoun is particularly important because otherwise, the sense of the sentence would be different.
If the pronoun were omitted, the sentence would be: "It is left to the vagaries of the mind to invent love and despair and anxiety and [...] pain."
In this construction, four different feelings would be invented.
But with the pronoun "their", the structure is more complex as only three feelings are invented  and each of them is accompanied by pain.
By this, even something positive as love gets a negative side and the critical attitude of the persona towards the mind  that is maintained through the poem is underlined.
Instead of circumscribing the baby with pronouns as in "Her First Week", there is already a direct reference in the first sentence of poem D: "this baby" .
What is striking about this expression is the determiner "this" as this implies that the audience already knows the baby or that they can see it.
It seems as if the persona would point with his/her finger to  the baby.
Thus, the use of "this" tries to establish closeness between the baby and the audience whereas the use of "that" would have kept more distance between them.
But this closeness is required because the persona who is not an I-narrator this time but who directly addresses the audience wants them to observe the baby in detail.
This is indicated by the imperative "Observe the distinct eyelashes..." .
As the baby becomes an object of observation then, it has to be near to the audience as otherwise the observation cannot be successful.
Especially as the things to observe, "eyelashes" and "fingernails"  for example, are all very small.
Similar to "The Spirit is too Blunt an Instrument", where the baby is treated like a scientific object that has to be studied, the baby or rather the baby´s body parts in "Her First Week" also are the objects of the sentences most of the time.
This can be seen from the fact that the pronoun "her", as already mentioned above, is the most predominant pronoun throughout the poem and that "her" describes an object position - it is either a direct object alone as in "I fed her"  or part of a direct object as in "I would tuck her arm" .
Consequently, the baby is in a passive and helpless role whereas the I, which is in subject position, takes over the active part by caring for the baby.
Thus, by using many transitive verbs with 'I' as subject and 'her' as object for describing actions between them, the active/passive relation is foregrounded.
In general, the process of how the 'I' takes care of the baby is described with the help of complex sentences and in a very detailed manner: "I would tuck her arm along her side and slowly turn her over.
She would tumble over part by part, [...],I´d slip a hand in, under her neck, slide the other under her back, and evenly lift her up."
Here, the first sentence is a coordinated one which is connected by the connector "and".
The second sentence is even more complex as it consists of three parts with three different phrasal verbs  which all refer back to one subject, the I.
By connecting the different phrases with commas and "and", a chronological order can be established that shows what is done first, second, third...
Furthermore, the use of two adverbs of manner, "slowly" and "evenly", and three adverbials to determine place  display how carefully the I treats the baby.
Every movement seems to be planned and done with great care so that nothing will happen to her.
How precious the baby is for the I, is also reflected by the modality of the sentences.
By using the auxiliary verb "would" and thus the conditional, the persona shows that she describes a process she seems to have done many times before and which she has already internalized.
This also fits with the expression "Every time I checked" .
By underlining the baby´s fragility and helplessness with the help of sentence structure and word choice , "little"  and "limp"  show), the persona´s worries that the baby could die become more understandable.
It also seems as if the baby plays a very important role for the humanity as whole  and the high responsibility of the I is expressed with the metaphor: "as if, history of the vertebrate had been placed in my hands".
Besides this metaphor, the baby´s weakness and need for help is also foregrounded with the help of several comparisons.
By stating that she is "like a load of damp laundry in the dryer"  or "like a loose bouquet to my side" , it is shown that the baby does not have any control over herself yet and that it needs somebody who nourishes it similar to flowers who have to be watered.
Contrary to this really passive role throughout the poem, she becomes active in the last line.
The expression "she was willing to stay" attributes her an own will and the desire to be alive.
The use of a progressive form, which contrasts to the simple tense in the rest of the poem, furthermore underlines that this will to stay is permanent and will not fade away.
In contrast to "Her First Week", where the I is really concerned about the baby and its health, the persona in "The Spirit is too Blunt an Instrument" only sees the baby, as already mentioned above, out of a scientific angle.
This can be seen by the highly technical vocabulary in lines 5-16  or "capillaries" ) which is used to describe the different body parts of the baby or as said in the poem "the intricate exacting particulars" .
Besides the two pre-modifying adjectives here, all the rest of the stanza serves as a post-modifier of the common noun "particulars" by describing in detail what these particulars are: "the tiny blind bones with their manipulating tendons, the knee and the knucklebones, the resilient fine meshings of ganglia and vertebrae in the chain of the difficult spine."
Structurally, this is not a real sentence as the verb is missing, but only a list of noun heads with their respective modifiers connected by "and" and commas and glued together with the help of many prepositions.
The effect of this enumeration and parallel structure is that the persona can emphasize all the different aspects of the body and thus underline its complicated structure.
Furthermore, the repetitive use of "the"  instead of "a" is probably used to establish a feeling of familiarity with the different parts as, though not thinking of them, everybody uses them unconsciously most of the time.
The listing then goes on in the whole next stanza and thus this stanza only consists of two complex sentences, both initiated by an imperative.
Consequently, both sentences lack a subject.
With the help of the imperatives, the persona directly addresses the audience and wants them to "observe"  and "imagine"  all these great details that the small body of a baby already has.
By this, he/she follows the aim to persuade the audience of a thesis he/she has, namely that "The spirit is too blunt an instrument to have made this baby."
Thus, in contrast to the descriptive sentence style in poem C, the persona in poem D tries to convince the audience by building up an argumentative structure.
The thesis in the first two lines is followed by the main argument, namely that a baby´s body is already so perfect that it cannot only be the result of "human passions" .
In that line, the conditional modality of the auxiliary verb 'could' in "could have managed" displays the hypothetical nature of the sentence.
The listing then serves as the main argument as it displays the complexity of the baby´s body.
Here, the pre-modifying adjectives are mainly used to emphasize this complexity and perfection even more as can be seen in "flawless"  or "difficult" .
By this, the persona wants to make the audience share his/her opinion.
The persona´s conclusion is then introduced and highlighted by the exclamation "No."
in line 21.
This expression is structurally prominent as, lacking noun and verb, it is no real sentence.
By standing on its own, it displays a complete negation without any compromises on the persona´s side.
The repetition of "no" in the next sentence then explains in further detail to what the persona opposes so much.
The use of the conditional in "could have done" displays here again the hypothetical character of the sentence.
All in all, though the two poems both deal with the description of a baby, they are very different.
The poem "Her First Week" describes the relationship between a weak, little baby and a loving person taking care for her and thus contains many verbs which describe the action between the two.
Here, the mother or grandmother is mainly the agent, which is displayed by the subject position of the I, whereas the baby is in object position most of the time because of her role as a patient.
The choice of words furthermore shows how concerned the I-narrator is with the baby´s health.
In contrast to this loving relationship, the persona in "The Spirit is too Blunt an Instrument" is not interested in the baby itself but he/she deals with it in a scientific manner and only uses it as a proof for his/her hypothesis.
Thus, the baby is reduced to its physical perfection and as a consequence, the poem contains more nouns than verbs as all the different body parts with their flawlessness are enumerated.
Instead of a descriptive style as in "Her First Week", the lexis and the structure of the sentences in that poem try to persuade the audience to share the persona´s view.
Nonsense poetry comes in many shapes and forms.
Sometimes the words are nonsense, the plot is absurd, or maybe the point of the poem is unfathomable.
Nonsense poems may creep up on you from a seemingly standard poetic form, or they may jump out, instantly recognisable on the page as nonsense.
They may seem touchingly simple, inexplicably complex, dark and mysterious or light and fluffy, perhaps all at the same time.
But hopefully, one thing all nonsense verse has in common, is it elicits a smile.
And as I hope to demonstrate with the following selection of poems, nonsense also challenges the way we think about language.
Nonsense is only described as such because it does not fit into a recognized system in our minds, or it subverts a system we are familiar with.
That is not to say it is chaos, rather, it operates under its own rules and within its own system so that something understood as nonsense in a wider field of literature may make perfect sense if we address it as nonsense.
Nonsense verse originated as parody, and this tradition has continued.
Carroll's The White Knight's Song is a parody of Wordsworth's Resolution and Independence and Tolstoy even created Kozma Prutkov, a character who wrote nonsense verse as a satire on imperial bureaucrats.
Nonsense itself has been parodied; W.S.
Gilbert is credited with writing a limerick without rhyme as a parody of Lear, and a short search on the internet throws up dozens of parodies of that most famous nonsense poem, Jabberwocky.
Although the masters of nonsense are generally regarded to be Carroll and Lear, some experts believe that the first exponents of nonsense were the 17th century poets John Taylor and John Hoskyns.
Theirs was a time of great exploration and travel writing became popular; their satire was a response to this.
Hoskyns' Cabalistical Verses and Taylor's Mockado, Fustian and Motley both effectively poke fun at the contemporary attitude of noble voyage and discovery by twisting accepted forms of the time.
Taylor's use of the sonnet leads us to expect love poetry, when in fact we find the poem jammed full of Greek mythological figures.
This overuse of symbolic figures carrying out nonsensical acts ridicules the false pomposity of the age.
This is echoed in the title; mockado being an imitation velvet, fustian a description of pretentious or pompous language, and motley bringing it all together in a haphazard mish-mash.
Hoskyns also uses iambic pentameter and this use of rigid form helps to structure the nonsense into something readable, rather than plain gibberish.
In fact, form plays an important part in nonsense verse.
The limerick instantly comes to mind when discussing nonsense verse, having been popularised by Lear and later used by Ogden Nash.
The one limerick included in this anthology is a great example of how form contributes to the overall effect; that is, of comedy and absurdity.
Because of its strict form and metre, words often have to be twisted to fit into the rhyme scheme, for example 'tearance' in the limerick included.
These forced rhymes are very playful, though we would not include these words in the category of nonsense words which are further discussed below.
Nonsense, however, does not just use accepted forms.
Christian Morgenstern's poem, The Funnels, is set out like a funnel and the enjambement, especially as the lines get smaller, means the rhythm trips along like the 'white moonlight' running down the funnels.
The commas that interrupt the third line break up the rhythm to sound like the dripping moonlight, and all these details of form and metre lead the reader to become involved in the poem, and forget that the situation is completely nonsense.
So the language in the above poem is not nonsense, but the situation it describes certainly is.
How does this challenge our views on language?
The structuralist Saussure asserted that language constitutes our world; it does not just record or label it.
So if language makes our reality, can the situation in The Funnels, or in any other nonsense poem be said to be nonsense?
This idea applies also to the creatures we encounter in nonsense verse.
T.S.
Eliot's Jellicle cats, for example, are described in much detail.
Not only their physical attributes, but also how they spend their time, and even details of their toilette.
Similarly, Lear's Jumblies are defined, though the constant repetition of their name throughout the poem itself and throughout all of Lear's poetry, is affirmation in itself.
If we extend this structuralist idea that language creates our world and think of nonsense verse as a structure with its own rules and system, we can begin to make sense of nonsense.
We can begin to see, for example, why we can read nonsense words and feel we almost know what they are talking about.
Words like 'frumious', 'borascible', 'flumpetty' and 'brillig'.
These nonsense words are usually associated with Lear and Carroll but the first example can be found in Cabbalistical Verses; where Hoskyns describes himself as a 'gymnosophist'.
In a footnote he says that the word is made up of two Greek words, in the same way that Carroll's so-called portmanteau words are made up of different words all melded together to create a new one.
I argue; how can we call this nonsense?
Are not many words we use day to day formed in this way?
Much of our language is stolen, poached from other cultures and so who is to say that 'slithy' is a nonsense word but 'hysterical' is not?
If nonsense verse is its own structure with its own set of rules, then 'slithy' exists in that structure not as a nonsense word, but as a perfectly valid, if you like, portmanteau word.
Another thing which portmanteau words achieve is a certain amount of ambiguity.
Let us take, as an example, the word 'frumious' from Jabberwocky.
Humpty Dumpty states that this word is a perfect balance between 'fuming' and 'furious', yet say it yourself, and without having to think about it a multitude of possibilities come into your head.
It is this ability of the words to open up endless possibilities that makes them so understandable despite, of course, being considered nonsense.
And because the train of thought which leads to the formation of portmanteau words is so entirely logical - well, it's not nonsense at all.
Is it?
This view of the nonsense poem as its own system is sometimes rather self defeating.
Surely if we treat nonsense in this way, there can be only one aim - to find meaning or to explain.
But as Michael Holquist points out in his essay What is a Boojum?
the purpose of rhyme is to align the two rhyming words together and create an association which produces meaning.
However, if we take nonsense as a system which has no meaning, there can be no meaning in rhyme.
This seems to be a valid point but I would argue that the creation of meaning is not the sole purpose of rhyme, and that nonsense poetry, like any other genre, is still subject to the same examination in terms of rhyme and metre.
Internal rhyme, for instance, plays a large role in much nonsense verse.
In W.S.
Gilbert's Sing for the Garish Eye there is assonance in 'bratticed/wracker' and 'braddled/sapster' which makes the reader say the poem loudly, and with confidence, which only serves to make it more absurd since its contents are nonsense.
Spike Milligan's ever popular On the Ning Nang Nong depends on its rhyme; without it the poem would seem like gibberish.
It is interesting here that the words we do not recognise are onomatopoeic; according to Saussure, this is the only instance where language is not apart from the word and its meaning is very clear, rather than arbitrary.
Could we then say that, according to Saussure, these 'nonsensical' onomatopoeic words  are in fact the only words in our language which actually make sense?
It is beginning to seem that nonsense verse has brought us into the realm of philosophy, and indeed it appears that sometimes the lines do blur.
Morgenstern's poem Philosophy is Born makes an interesting point.
Morgenstern is satirising his contemporaries' complete faith in language as their medium and it is not until the last line that the poem slips into nonsense, or philosophy.
However, we must always remember that nonsense is there to be enjoyed.
The pulling apart of nonsense to discover its structures may serve us to understand it better, but no greater enjoyment can be taken from nonsense verse than that which comes from simply reading it.
As Lear himself said, his aim was 'nonsense, pure and absolute'.
'Madness' is a difficult concept to define or explain.
One definition offered by Phillips is that "Madness is divisive and undermining", and "when we imagine the so-called mad they appear before us in lurid or horrifying or fascinating or discomforting images."
Amongst modern psychoanalysts, it has been suggested that "we are born with varying amounts of sanity and madness inside us".
Indeed, some of Melanie Klein's followers are "adverse to madness, though resigned to the inevitability of our unending struggle with it because, like sin, it is assumed to be integral to our nature."
Many of the elements we associate with madness are instinctual and irrational, those which many psychoanalysts believe to be concentrated within the unconscious, or 'Id'.
The conscious self, or 'ego', on the other hand "cannot exist in the individual from the start; the ego has to be developed".
The development of the ego cannot avoid cultural or social influences; in fact it could be argued that it is because of these influences that there is a need for it to develop.
What madness reveals then is perhaps a created "second self, a stranger within, a place where all that cannot for one reason or another be expressed or realized in civil life takes up residence."
The suggestion that "Madness lies in subjugation by the state," and also "in the way the state makes us subjects" can be supported by a number of literary texts and theories.
However, as this essay will argue, it also lies in how we construct ourselves within society "by the intricate complex of subject and object relations that constitutes our symbolic realities."
Ken Kesey's novel One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest has been described as "a product of its time, the anti-authoritarian and iconoclastic sixties, celebrating the rebellion of an individual against the system."
One of the most prominent elements of the novel is its reflection upon contemporary reservations concerning "established psychiatric practices and institutions--lobotomy and electroconvulsive therapy, institutionalization and overreliance on drugs".
Moreover, it highlights the way such medical practices were used by the state as "instruments of social purification masquerading as science with little diagnostic or therapeutic value."
On one level, the novel is about the political subjugation by the state.
However, it is perhaps more poignant when read as a narrative of the liberation of individuals from both political and cultural subjugation.
Towards the end of the 1950s, psychiatry had reached a prestigious peak in America.
Those practicing it were regarded as "knights of reason and order saving damsels from the proliferating dragons of the mind."
However, by the 1960s it seemed that "the dragons had become the psychiatrists and the institutions of psychiatric care themselves."
This is personified in One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest through the character of Nurse Ratched, or the "Big Nurse", "who runs the psychiatric ward by means of a dehumanizing and repressive regime of terror."
Her "manipulative skill and ability to destroy by insinuation render her an infuriating and insidious corporate tool."
During this period it seemed to many that "the modern concept of madness was a cultural invention of control"  and that doctors were used "as a way of keeping dangerous people at bay" .
The character of McMurphy is considered on the surface to be a threat to society, held in custody for statutory rape of an underage girl.
However, the threat he represents is far more complex.
If relating the characters of the novel to Freud's model of the ego, one might compare McMurphy to the Id; to the primary, irrational energies of the mind which Freud characterised as "a combination of sexual libido and other instincts, such as aggression".
His freedom of spirit and strength as an individual is a threat against a repressive state and society, and he is consequently locked away and labelled insane.
Having worked in a mental hospital, Kesey, too, had become suspicious of the "boundaries that had been created between sane and insane."
Furthermore, he began to question whether madness lay in "the common practice [of] conforming to a mindless system or the attempt to escape from such a system altogether."
Indeed, the pivotal paradox of One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest is that of trying to escape the inescapable.
It could be argued then that McMurphy's only madness is his relentless efforts to conquer the evils of the system.
Chief Bromden also suggests this in his narration: "The thing he was fighting, you couldn't whip it for good.
All you could do is keep on whipping it, till you couldn't come out any more and somebody else had to take your place."
Although McMurphy is ostensibly defeated when Nurse Ratched orders him a lobotomy, the release of his soul "through the chief's love" essentially symbolises the "triumph of the spirit over repression and death."
McMurphy is essentially a catalyst for the other patients to realise they have been subjugated by the state, and to reassert themselves as members of society.
On the other hand, the first person narrator, Chief Bromden is the equivalent of the ego, which "helps to carry out the process of censorship and repression."
It could be argued that Bromden adopts a muted persona as a mechanism "for redirecting libido into safer channels, including repression, projection and introjection [...] rationalism and sublimation."
The extent to which Bromden can be considered 'mad' is indeed questionable.
Many have regarded him to be schizophrenic; however, it might be more accurate to suggest that his madness is driven by state subjugation.
His paranoid suspicion of the 'Combine' could in fact be interpreted as an accurate perception of "a collaboration of governmental and industrial groups he believes are trying to control people by way of machines" ; this is, of course, what is happening within in the hospital.
However, neither the Chief, nor even Harding, blame this national Combine, or in fact anything, for rendering "some people mad and incapacitated" whilst others seem "to transcend their own limitations and the obstacles thrown in their way."
It is not only McMurphy who is caught in a paradox; the "fundamental opposition" in the novel, as suggested by a number of critics, is "not between madness and sanity but between being trapped and free."
It becomes possible here to question whether the presentation of individuals in One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest suggests that madness lies wholly in subjugation by the state.
Perhaps it would be more sufficient to say that, in the case of Chief Bromden, the latter part of the statement is more accurate, but also that his 'madness' stems from his own inability to construct himself within the present symbolic order.
Chief Bromden's life story provides some insight to the problems he suffers in his later life, and within the novel.
Born to an Indian chief and white mother, his hybrid character is established from his birth.
Through childhood he witnesses the domination and destruction of his father by both government authorities and indeed his mother.
Freud suggests that "Identification is known to psychoanalysis as the earliest expression of an emotional tie with another person [...] A little boy will exhibit a special interest in his father; he would like to grow like him, and take his place everywhere.
We say simply that he takes his father as his ideal."
It could thus be argued that the chief is essentially without a strong male role model, which affects his own self construction; he believes that, like his father, he too is weak, and thus becomes weak.
Billy Bibbit describes the Chief to McMurphy: "I think somebody m-m-measured him once at s-six feet seven; but even if he is big, he's scared of his own sh-sh-shadow.
Just a bi-big deaf Indian."
Furthermore, it is likely that Bromden's experiences of fighting in World War II would also have weakened him.
The reasons behind his hospitalisation remain ambiguous, and it has been suggested amongst critics that, like McMurphy, the Chief was in fact sane when he entered the institution.
The arrival of McMurphy on the ward initiates a process of liberation, which is driven by his natural desire to "feel alive".
Freud proposed that the qualities of the Id "propel the human organism through life"; and it is perhaps through McMurphy's influence and encouragement that Bromden learns to "embrace life as well".
McMurphy's presence seems to aid Bromden in constructing an identity; he gains the confidence to speak and take responsibility for his own actions.
This of course climaxes when he has the personal strength to euthanize McMurphy.
The influence of emasculating and oppressive authorities indeed suggests that Bromden's insecurities are, to an extent, consequent of subjugation by the state.
However, his liberation perhaps suggests that his 'madness' stems more from the inability to construct himself within that state.
The novel ends when Bromden has found his sanity and can re-establish himself within the world.
Chief Bromden's liberation could be compared to that of Esther Greenwood in Sylvia Plath's The Bell Jar.
Throughout the novel Esther struggles with the construction of her own identity.
The ending of The Bell Jar has been considered problematic, since Esther's liberation appears to stem from her ability to conform.
However, it could also be argued that, like Chief Bromden she has freed herself from the way the state makes her a subject and her liberation is in the ability to construct herself within the world she lives in.
Marilyn Boyer proposes that "Plath was assessing the plight of the young woman artist at mid-century who was attempting to overcome the values of domesticity in a uni-polar milieu."
A key element which seems to obstruct Esther's construction of her 'self' is that of gender.
Boyer expands this point to suggest that "If Esther and her colleagues in New York City are victimized, it is partly due to the mindset prevalent in those times [the 1950s]: women should stay at home, cook meals, clean house, and bear children."
Indeed, this might suggest that Esther's 'madness' lies in the way the state makes her subject to cultural expectations.
However, this argument is problematic.
It might be argued that what stimulates Esther's madness is in fact the frustration that she herself cannot, and might never be able, to do these things.
In Chapter Seven, Esther: "started adding up all the things I couldn't do."
What is noticeable is the way she begins this list with particularly female gendered activities, "I began with cooking."
Freud proposed that the "crucial point in gender formation is that of identification, the molding of a self from equations made between oneself and external objects through the internalization of images or models of those objects."
Indeed, within this passage, Esther compares herself to her mother and grandmother who "were such good cooks I left everything to them", and "Jody, my best and only girl-friend at college" .
Throughout the novel she frequently forms identifications with other females she admires.
Firstly, Doreen, who "made me forget my worries.
I felt wise and cynical as hell"; and a little later, Esther decides to "be loyal to Betsy and her innocent friends.
It was Betsy I resembled at heart."
It might be suggested that Esther is in fact searching in others for what she herself needs to make her feel whole; no longer "melting into the shadows like the negative of a person I'd never seen before in my life."
Lacan explored such ideas about "the origin of castration or loss": It could be argued then that Esther's 'madness' lies less in subjugation by the state than in her own problematic self construction.
Further into the chapter, Esther sees her "life branching out [...] like the green fig-tree".
Each fig represents something that she would like to be.
It is here that Plath suggests clearly the root of Esther's depression: For Esther, this possible loss is traumatic; her 'madness' lies partly in both her inability to accept this loss and make a decision, and her attempts to aspire to an impossible perfection.
This is perhaps why the ending is significant.
Like Chief Bromden, Esther is able to recognise herself, and makes the decision to re-establish herself in the world, guided by others, but "perfectly free."
Jacques Lacan's theory of 'The Mirror Stage' can be employed to support this argument.
He proposes that "identity is a form of identification [...] the subject's ego is 'that which is reflected of his form in his objects'".
Lacan cites the moment when a child first recognises its own reflection and "the transformation that takes place in the subject when he assumes an image": Indeed, what is significant about the human reflection is the consequent awareness of the boundaries of the body and the recognition of ourselves as distinct from other people and objects.
What Malcolm MacLachlan suggests is "complex here is the paradoxical move towards acceptance of this specular image  while still experiencing one's body from the 'inside' - introceptively".
The image we see in the mirror is referred to by Lacan as the 'ideal I', or 'ideal ego' which is "defined in the way the subject projects itself onto other objects, moves out into identification with them."
This is made distinct from the 'ego ideal' which "develops when external objects are taken in or introjected."
MacLachlan suggests that this "schism between of oneself and to oneself is the source of a perpetual alienation" .
This indeed can be applied to Esther.
There are key moments within the novel when Esther cannot recognise her reflection.
As early as chapter two she describes her own reflection as "The face in [the mirror] looked like the reflection in a ball of dentist's mercury."
Esther's use of the third person here detaches herself from the reflection.
However, a more poignant instance of this follows her suicide attempt.
When given a mirror Esther, at first cannot "see what the trouble was.
It wasn't a mirror at all, but a picture."
The description of her reflection that follows is again in the third person: "The most startling thing about the face was its supernatural conglomeration of bright colours."
The moment of recognition comes when she smiles and "The mouth in the mirror cracked a grin".
Kenny proposed that "The body is a symbol.
Its appearance and actions point beyond itself to an inner world, but also beyond itself to a total life situation."
It might be suggested then that whilst Esther struggles to recognise herself physically, this could also be read as a metaphor for her relationship with her mental self.
Boyer suggests that "Plath constructs the disabling experiences which are enmeshed into the female body as metaphors for a fractured language"; "writing the disabled body in The Bell Jar engenders a series of intimate encounters with the ineffectuality of language."
William Watkin writes that "It is a well observed symptom of depression that language dies and that the ultimate result of life-threatening depression is total silence."
Like Esther, Chief Bromden in One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest could not situate himself within the symbolic order, and consequently retreats from language as a means of defending himself against "real possibilities of unpleasure coming from the outside world".
However, where Bromden has regressed into silence before the beginning of Kesey's novel, Esther begins her narrative at the time of her writing scholarship.
However, further into the narrative she decides to write a novel about the expression of 'self', yet when she tries to write about herself it becomes clear that she is trapped to such an extent that she can only respond to what she is doing at the present moment.
This is echoed further in a number of episodes within the novel.
When trying to read Finnegan's Wake "The letters [...] separate, each from the other, and jiggle up and down in a silly way.
Then they associated themselves in fantastic untranslatable shapes".
Soon after she attempts to write a letter to Doreen: Boyer argues that "The major depression that Esther experiences throws her body into a disabled state that affects all aspects of her being, especially her thought processes.
Her thinking becomes fragmented and her writing disjointed."
The representation of Esther's individual 'madness' indeed suggests that it lies largely in her struggle to construct her sense of 'self'.
Watkin suggests that "our society [is] so strictly controlled by the linguistic dictates of the symbolic order"; "a sense of self occurs through social interaction and relatedness" within this society.
Esther's inability to employ language suggests that this interaction is incomplete.
The writings of Becker have suggested that "The intelligence of human beings, coupled with their capacity for self-reflection, and the ability to think about the future, gives them the unique capacity to contemplate the inevitability of their own death."
It might be argued that Esther's 'madness' lies in an excess of self-reflection and thought about the future; less in how the state has made her subject, and more in her inability to construct herself within it.
Similarly, the Chief's adopted silence allows him to reflect upon his surroundings.
However, his deeply internalised insecurities restrict his ability to consider a future beyond the hospital.
Becker also believed that "humans would be rooted to inaction and abject terror if they were continually to contemplate their vulnerability and mortality".
Bromden's decision to remain in the institution is perhaps a sign of this.
The internalisation of state subjugation has perhaps rendered him incapable of leaving.
However, his insecurities stem far deeper, his liberation demonstrating that it is the inability to construct a sense of self that has perhaps been his only downfall.
Esther too has to discover how to construct her sense of self within the present symbolic order.
She internalises pre-conceived ideas of femininity which causes her to perceive herself as a failure.
Living within a time of transition with regard to societal roles of women, Esther, it seems, is not in fact under so much pressure to be any of the gendered things she considers.
Thus, her insanity lies more in a failure to construct her own sense of self.
Both novels demonstrate that 'madness', no matter where it stems from, can be escaped.
It has been suggested that "The resulting perception that one is a valuable member of a meaningful universe constitutes self-esteem, and self-esteem is the primary psychological mechanism by which culture serves its death-denying function."
At the end of One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest the Chief feels valued and thus confident enough to reclaim his sanity.
Esther, too, "Although interminably abused and temporarily handicapped, [...] does emerge into her own "room", beyond the stifling enclosure of the bell jar."
The following work is a 'critical essay' which focuses on the treatment of London in Dickens's novels and particularly in Oliver Twist  and Little Dorrit .
Raymond Williams argued in an essay on Dickens published by M. Slater in 1970 that the nineteenth-century novelist "was the first English novelist to explore the modern city - in its form as the metropolis- as a social fact and as a human landscape".
It is not uncommon to refer to Dickens as a writer of the city.
Most of his novels are set in London and the role of the capital is often crucial in the development of the plots.
This essay tries and analyses key critical texts - critical books, essays or journal articles- which consider the representation of London and the city in Dickens's novels.
By relating and comparing them, the following study forms a basic critical history of Dickens's treatment of London and shows the evolution of critical studies of this subject area.
This essay will first focus on a bibliography of Dickensian criticism written by R. C. Churchill in 1975.
This book is a valuable material to enter and start to tackle the subject since it provides the references of a wide range of works focusing on it.
In a second part, a few critical texts on Dickens's London and representation of the city will be introduced and analysed.
Finally, this essay will present and study the main and recurrent themes and ideas on the subject area that critics have underlined through the years.
A Bibliography of Dickensian Criticism, 1836-1975 was published by R. C. Churchill in 1975.
It refers to a great number of works on Dickens and it also provides many quotations.
These quotes are either the main idea of a critical text dealing with the Victorian novelist or they are a relevant reference to Dickens extracted from a text which is not especially dedicated to him.
The bibliography is divided into categories.
For example, the first twenty pages are devoted to general criticism of the nineteenth-century.
Another section focuses on aspects in Dickens such as "His Characters" or "Dickens and Childhood".
Among them, there is a section dedicated to "Dickens's London".
It presents around thirty entries and some of them offer relevant quotations.
In this section, R. C. Churchill refers to works written between 1837 and 1975.
As a consequence, this bibliography provides materials contemporary with Dickens's time but which are hardly available today.
However, they imply that Dickens's treatment of London was already a matter of critical concern at the time when the novelist was writing.
For instance, Churchill quotes the English journalist Walter Bagehot who wrote in 1858 a review on Charles Dickens in which he stated that "Mr Dickens's genius is especially suited to the delineation of city life...
He describes London like a special correspondent to prosperity."
As will be shown later in this essay, more recent critics of Dickens do not argue in favour of the association of London with prosperity.
On the contrary, they underline the connection of the city with death or hell.
The bibliography also refers to renowned writers who have commented on Dickens's London.
They can be contemporaries of the Victorian novelist such as Ainsworth and Emerson.
In the preface of his novel Rookwood , Ainsworth wrote that "Mr Dickens, with his wonderful knowledge of London life and character, and unequalled powers of delineation, has done more for this metropolis, in the Pickwick Papers and Oliver Twist, than Paul de Kock, in all his works, has done for Paris".
As for Emerson, he mentioned during a lecture at Boston in 1848 on 'English Traits' that "Dickens, with preternatural apprehension of the language and manners, and the varieties of street life, with pathos and laughter, with patriotic and still enlarging generosity, writes London tracts."
Other quotations come from later writers such as George Orwell who wrote in 1839 in an essay on Charles Dickens "...from the age of nine onwards he was brought up in London in commercial surroundings, and generally in an atmosphere of struggling poverty.
Mentally he belongs to the small urban bourgeoisie..." Among the works presented by Churchill, only the last mentioned, Alexander Welsh's The  City of Dickens  was made available for this essay and will be referred to in the following work.
Churchill's book establishes a first approach to the treatment of London by Dickens, it mentions useful materials and quotations.
Nevertheless, it remains mainly anecdotal and it is only by analysing proper critical texts that the writing of a critical history is possible.
This essay focuses on three major critical books, J. Hillis Miller's Charles Dickens : The World of His Novels , A.Welsh's The City of Dickens  and F.S.
Schwarzbach's Dickens and the City .These works were written by academics in the 1970's.
They are regularly referred to by more recent studies on Dickens's London.
This essay also mentions a non-academic work, the book introduced by Peter Ackroyd and commented by Dudgeon, Dickens's London : an Imaginative Vision .
Besides, two other texts were useful for this critical history: M. Baumgarten's essay "Fictions of the city"  and B. Deutschendorf's article "Dickens' Oliver Twist" .
Both Hillis Miller and Schwarzbach present their studies by looking at a certain number of Dickens's novels and proceed by following the chronology of their publication.
Miller explores six novels and analyses them as the transformation of the real world of Dickens into an imaginary world with certain special qualities of its own.
He argues that "throughout all the swarming multiplicity of his novels", Dickens created a "world which is unique and the same".
Miller points out that the element which presides at the centre of the imaginative universe of Dickens is the "great modern commercial city" and he underlines Dickens's interpretation of the city-world.
Schwarzbach's approach is similar to Miller's but if the latter analyses the world of Dickens in general, the former focuses on the treatment of the city only.
Schwarzbach stresses that London played an important role in Dickens's own life and is at the centre of the novelist creative imagination.
His work explores the Victorian writer's approach to the city and examines how it evolves through his novels.
As for Welsh, he presents Dickens's treatment of the city as a great metaphor.
At the difference of the two critics previously mentioned, he is more concerned by the symbolic meanings of the novelist's portrayal of London than the descriptions in themselves.
Welsh divides his study in themes which are symbolically related to the Dickensian city.
For example, he underlines the association of London with death and hell, greed and money, or the hearth and home in the different works of the novelist.
As far as Ackroyd and Dudgeon are concerned, their study is more focused on the autobiographical dimension.
It highlights the fact that Dickens incorporated his personal approach and experience of the city into his work.
As for Baumgarten and Deutschendorf, both critics underline the connection between Dickens's characters and London and the way the novelist used the city as a reflection of his protagonists' personalities.
All these different critical texts encompass a period of thirty five years, Miller's book was written in 1970 whereas Deutschendorf's article was published in 2005.
Despite the gap in time, these various studies share many characteristics, analogies and connections can be drawn between them.
The debate over Dickens and London sheds light on a great number of motifs which are recurrent from study to study.
The aim of this essay is now to focus on these features and to interrelate the different theories and conceptions of them.
Charles Dickens was immensely attracted to London.
His life was conditioned by the city.
As a consequence, he incorporated his personal experience of the city into his work.
On the one hand, Schwarzbach stresses the fictionalization of some events of the novelist's life.
He argues that Dickens's "fiction makes free and creative use of every detail of his outer and inner life".
The writer's novels depict characters, places or incidents which were often inspired by the his own life.
Similarly, Ackroyd and Dudgeon emphasise the autobiographical dimension of David Copperfield  and present the novel as "Dickens's auto-novel".
On the other hand, Hillis Miller is more concerned by the novelist's personal state of mind at the time he was writing.
He points out that a work such as Pickwick Papers  is the verbal expression of Dickens's mood, or sensibility, or spiritual state" when he wrote it.
Although Schwarzbach argues that "Dickens could not conceive of meaningful life being lived anywhere outside of the city", most of the critics underline that the novelist also considered life in the city as impossible which is contradictory to Ainsworth's previous comment.
Critical books point out Dickens's awareness of the many problems at the heart of the city such as unsanitary problems or the problem of prostitution.
As a consequence, Dickens drew a rather dark representation of the capital.
The novelist recurrently interpreted London as a dark labyrinth.
This image is often enlightened by critical texts.
Schwarzbach stresses an autobiographical impulse in Dickens's vison of London as a labyrinth.
He argues that "the London of the dark labyrinth was a precise reflection of the London of the Blacking Factory" where the novelist was sent to work when he was still a child and of which he kept haunting memories.
Both Schwarzbach and Hillis Miller regard Oliver Twist and Little Dorrit as the two major novels which underline the labyrinthine city.
Hillis Miller points out that the London of Oliver Twist is "the dream or poetic symbol of an infernal labyrinth, inhabited by the Devil himself" who is incarnated in the character of Fagin.
In Little Dorrit, the same critic argues that the image of the labyrinth is symbolically represented by the "Circumlocution Office, with its inextricably tangled halls, offices, passageways, and levels of authority through which Arthur Clennam and Daniel Doyce meander hopelessly [...]" whereas Schwarzbach stresses the labyrinthine complexity of the city itself which is reflected in the recurrent images and ceaseless repetitions of words such as "wilderness", "grave", "dark" or "smoke".
The image of the labyrinth is often associated with the one of the prison.
Schwarzbach argues that Dickens's "fear of the prison had been one of his association with London".
As for Hillis Miller, he underlines how the novelist incorporated images of imprisonment into his work.
For example, the critic interprets Fagin's den as a "windowless prison, dark and seemingly underground like a cave or a grave", a place of "enclosure".
The image of the Dickensian city as a labyrinth or a prison is often related to the actual atmosphere of Victorian London.
In his essay "The Life and Characters of Charles Dickens" , H. C. Dent wrote that Dickens "was a Londoner to the core...as firmly attached to the grimy, foggy, grey old city...as a homing pigeon to its loft."
Ackroyd and Dudgeon point out that the descriptions of fog in Dickens are not "some imagined and idealized obscurity : the London fog was real [...] due to a concentration of chimneys and factories".
Hillis Miller is more concerned by the metaphorical and symbolic aspect of the fog.
He argues that in Bleak House  "the fog is both a physical moist and a spiritual blindness, [which] forms an opaque barrier between any one place and any other".
Dickens's London appears as a hostile place in which life and survival for the characters remain complex and difficult.
Dickens's representation of the city gives a sense of alienation and dehumanization.
Hillis Miller argues that the labyrinthine city is "a symbol of the metaphorical alienation of man."
Both Schwarzbach and Welsh underline the anonymity of the city-dwellers.
The former argues that Dickens's characters are "devoid of individual identities" whereas the latter comments on the "loneliness of the city-dwellers" in Dickens's writing.
Both critics stress the image of a bestial city.
Schwarzbach states that in Nicholas Nickleby , Dickens mixed "human and animal sights and sounds".
Similarly, Welsh highlights "the carnivorousness of men" in Dickens's novels and shows how the novelist related human beings and animals in the market scene of Oliver Twist.
The market description is connected to the image of the crowd.
Schwarzbach argues that the crowd "is in fact central to Dickens's conception of the city" in novels such as Pickwick Papers, Oliver Twist and Nicholas Nickleby.
He pinpoints the "ominous" and threatening aspect of the mob in the novelist's work.
As far as Welsh is concerned, he regards the crowd as a corollary effect of the labyrinthine city.
He explains that in Oliver Twist, the labyrinth of London is on several occasions "turned into a hostile crowd."
The mob is as dangerous as the labyrinth is since it threatens the lives of the protagonists.
When Oliver is accused of having stolen Mr. Brownlow' s handkerchief, he tries to run away but is chased by the crowd.
Hillis Miller explains that "the aim of the mob is not simply to catch him, but to 'crowd' him to death."
Similarly, later in the novel, the "crowd tries to tear Fagin to pieces."
If both Schwarzbach and Welsh underline the threatening aspect of Dickens's crowd, Ackroyd, in the introduction of his study, presents a more positive judgement of it.
He argues that Dickens's novels "embody the vigour and the disorder of the city.
[...] Dickens and his contemporaries were celebrating the sheer spectacle of people gathered together, a celebration of human energy at a time when its possibilities were just becoming apparent".
Another recurrent critical aspect of Dickens's city is the links existing between London and its city-dwellers.
For example, Deutschendorf underlines the influence of the city on the characters.
In his article "Dickens' Oliver Twist", he shows that there is "a connection between the city and the individual", the Dodger grew faster than an ordinary child due to the "fast-paced life of London" while the latter is physically associated with the city because he is portrayed as the mirror image of his dark and dirty den.
Finally, a last popular theme underlined by critics on the Dickensian London is the idea of opposition.
Welsh argues that Dickens uses "stock contrasts of satire" in Oliver Twist with his allusions to "wealth and poverty, virtue and vice, housed and houseless, day and night".
The city is recurrently apposed to the country.
Schwarzbach stresses the "tension between the life of repose, represented by the country, and the life of activity, by the city."
He also points out that Dickens associates "innocence with the country and misery with the city."
Both Schwarzbach and Welsh present the correlations between on the one hand the city and death and on the other hand the country and life in Dickens's novels.
For the former, there is a "neat separation of country and life from city and death" in Oliver Twist whereas the latter analyses the city as a place of danger and death and the country as an unreal pastoral refuge, a "Platonic world".
As for Hillis Miller, "the city is cut off altogether from the divine, the country is close to Heaven".
These associations with death and hell are even more singular when Dickens's readers take into account the analogy between the city and society in general.
This last idea has been studied and highlighted by many critics.
Both F. Harrison and Schwarzbach present Dickens's conception of London as a microcosm of the entire society.
In "Dickens's Place in Literature" , Harrison wrote "...
It is quite true : London is a microcosm, an endless and bottomless Babylon; which, perhaps, no man has ever known so well as did Dickens.
This was his library : he gathered that vast encyclopaedia of human nature which some are inclined to call 'cockney', but if it be, 'Cockayne' must be a very large country indeed."
If Harrison's judgement is rather positive with its connection to Babylon, Schwarzbach has rather a pessimist view when he writes "the world could be seen to exist in microcosm - the world's metropolis.
London.
[...] the epitome of the world at large, containing every human type or, more usually every human vice."
All in all, these critics show that Dickens provided his readers with a negative image of London and consequently of society in general.
Literary critics have been and are still interested in the treatment of the city and London by Charles Dickens.
Some of them consider it as a crucial element in the plots of the Victorian novelist's works.
Murray Baumgarten argues that "no wonder that London, the modern city writ large, is the central protagonist of [Dickens's] fiction and one of the defining elements of his popular success."
Similarly, Pritchett points out that "the first thing to say about the comedy of Dickens is that London, the city itself, becomes the chief character..." This essay has tried to present the main ideas of some Dickensian critics as far as the representation of London is concerned.
It has shown that many theories are recurrent from critic to critic, for example the labyrinthine dimension of London or the analogy between city-dwellers and the city.
If approaches to Dickens's London are different, academic or not, symbolic or textual, it follows from this essay that they usually concur and lead to the same ideas.
This last remark is probably an approval of Hillis Miller's statement that Dickens created a "world which is unique and the same".
Dickens's London is unique and interpreted by critics just as the novelist conceived it.
Wyatt's 'Forget Not Yet' is laced with various poetic techniques, some quite clearly recognisable, yet others more hidden.
Nonetheless, all these diverse poetic devices culminate to assist in the understanding of the poem as a whole.
The poem's rhyme scheme follows an almost constant regular pattern, comprising aaab, cccb, dddb, eeeb, fffg, .
In effect, this imitates the form of a song, which is further reiterated by the repetition of the line 'Forget not yet,' mimicking what would be the refrain; however a certain irony lies in this predominant line of the poem.
The regularity achieved through the repetition of 'Forget not yet' builds up an anticipation of continuance, yet the line itself perhaps implies departure; hence, a fitting sense of closure is achieved through the break in the regularity of this repetition in the final line of the poem, where 'yet' becomes 'this. '
In addition, it could be suggested that the internal rhyme used in the line  'Forget not yet' seeks to emphasise the word 'forget' and thus bring about a further sensation of closure.
Essentially, in the same manner as the routine and regularity  of the poem have changed, the relationship between the lovers has also changed.
Collectively, the upbeat rhythm combined with the repetition of 'Forget not yet' seems to make the poem one of contrasts, where we see a paradoxical irony between continuation and departure.
Seemingly, the buoyant rhythm, maintained by the iambic tetrameter present in the majority of the lines  creates an air of jauntiness, yet at the same time, as mentioned the notion of departure is emphasised.
Wyatt also uses figurative language in order to perhaps create an image of labour, which is clear by the lexical cluster consisting of laborious type words such as 'travail,' 'service,' and 'assays.'
In fact, in the first stanza, 'travail' is placed with 'tried' and 'truth,' thus Wyatt effectively uses the rule of three in order to fully stress the strife faced by the lover who encounters 'cruel wrong' and  'scornful ways,' regardless of rejection.
Despite the invocation of the concept of hard work and strife, it seems that the lover remains resilient and we are also made aware of the lover's steadfast commitment, as demonstrated in the third stanza, through the use of the phrase 'painful patience.'
In addition, it is made clear that the lover's 'great travail' is 'gladly spent.'
Despite 'denays,' the lover continued to display a 'steadfast faith' which 'never moved,' and the alliteration of the letter 'p' accentuates the harsh consonant sound and thus mimics the painfulness of perusing a loved one despite rejection.
Wyatt's poem clearly depicts an unfaltering love which is resilient towards various tests.
The main tenets of love, faith, commitment and labour are readily depicted through the use of alliteration, internal rhyme and the effect of masculine end rhyme, which gives a somewhat definite and concluding feel to the poem.
In turn, this illustrates the closure the lover wishes to seek with the relationship.
Oscar Wilde described this absurd quote as a philosophy, and to some extent it is a philosophy by which much of his literature exists.
He raises this simple ploy to an almost ludicrous level in the construction of his social comedies.
In so doing he parodies high society, portraying it as obsessed with trivia, to such an extent that it can no longer recognise the serious things in life.
Wilde uses the idea to discuss not only major issues such as love and religion but also the topical ones of his time.
In some ways the theme of trivialising the serious and vice versa can be attributed to the decadence of the period, which so fascinated Wilde.
His works encapsulate many features of the movement, such as perversity, which was considered to be an element of the fin-de-siecle.
This is apparent in numerous paradoxical statements and the manner in which characters are so fickle, constantly changing their minds over issues as serious as marriage.
He satirizes men by demonstrating that they can be as perverse as women.
The egoism associated with decadence contributes to the comedy with absurd confusions in priorities, such as the importance of the name 'Ernest' in a suitor rather than love.
It is also apparent in such characters as Dorian and Algy from The Importance of Being Earnest, who consider themselves to be above morality.
Another feature is artificiality, which trivialises 'friendships' in society.
This provides much of the humour in The Importance of Being Earnest, which is meant to be a comedy of manners.
As Cecily says, everyone has a "shallow mask of manner" which is donned and removed according to necessity.
It exposes everyone as being guilty of dishonesty and falseness - vices which were considered essential for advancement in society.
Gwendolen claims, "In matters of grave importance, style; not sincerity, is the vital thing", and in The Picture of Dorian Gray, society "feels instinctively that manners are of more importance than morals".
The rapid switching of truths and lies, earnestness and duplicity exemplify how muddled Victorian values of honesty and responsibility had become.
Many of the topics spoken of lightly in The Importance of Being Ernest were the subject of earnest debate at the time.
This included marriage, theology, education, and the agricultural depression.
When Gwendolen says that the country bores her, Cecily replies "This is what the newspapers call agricultural depression, is it not?
I believe the aristocracy are suffering from it very much just at the present".
By trivializing these issues, Wilde distances himself from earnest culture and theatre, whilst creating an original comedy.
One of the key things that Wilde always seems to insist on trivialising is love and marriage.
He uses his plays to expose the way in which marriage is used as a manipulative tool to advance a person's financial and societal stance.
He is clear that love and marriage are two very different things.
In The Importance of Being Earnest, love is inconsequential to Lady Bracknell, as Wilde uses her to satirize the rituals and attitudes present in Victorian society.
For her, birth right and wealth are far more important than love when it comes to making a good match.
Much comedy is provided in the discussion between her and Jack as she assesses his suitability as a husband for Gwendolen.
It results in Lady Bracknell exclaiming "You can hardly imagine that I and Lord Bracknell would dream of allowing our only daughter....to marry into a cloak-room, and form an alliance with a parcel".
The idea of it as a business transaction is exacerbated by comments from characters throughout the play.
Miss Prism claims that most unmarried people "live entirely for pleasure".
When Jack says he has come to town to propose, Algy replies "I thought you had come up for pleasure?...
I call that business".
The happy idea of engagement is made into a serious business as it is considered that men should practice proposing to lots of girls before making a real commitment, and Cecily claims that theirs "would hardly have been a really serious engagement if it hadn't been broken off at least once".
Once a couple is married there is still cynicism, producing such comments as "Three is company, two is none" and "Divorces are made in heaven".
The younger ones do have some idea of love, but trivialise it with requirements such as their betrothed must have the name 'Ernest'.
The proof of the ridiculousness of their relationships is in the way massive dishonesty is so easily forgiven and resolved.
In The Picture of Dorian Gray, Dorian also trivialises love through his fleeting relationship with Sybil.
He is simply in love with love and wants a love story rather than reality.
By 'falling in love' with an actress he gets to enjoy many different types of women, but none of them are real.
He is so full of vanity and selfishness that he is only capable of loving himself.
When Sybil commits suicide, even death is trivialised as it is seen as a perfect tragic ending.
Henry trivialises love in marriage by cheating and appearing unbothered when his wife eventually leaves him, only conceding that he had been quite "fond of her".
It is the same case in A Woman of No Importance, as it is considered surprising when a couple actually gets on well with each other.
There are some examples of people understanding true love, but they are usually marginalized or dismissed for being dull characters.
Examples of this include Mrs Arbuthnot who knows what the true requirements for marriage should be - love and trust- rather than it being a 'business' deal, and perhaps also the love between Miss Prism and Chasuble.
In some ways Wilde turns religion into a triviality.
There is little mention of God from most of the main characters.
They are full of selfishness and greed, and there are obviously a great number of unholy events within the texts, such as murder and infidelity.
In A Picture of Dorian Gray, Henry and his philosophies on life are taken very seriously, even though he is often described as the devil in disguise.
Chasuble is ridiculed in The Importance of Being Earnest and christenings are requested without any thought for their religious purpose, they are even considered to be a heroic act by the fiancées.
There is a modernist sense of disillusionment amongst the characters, as Dorian says "life can be very disappointing".
However, possibly as a relic from the staunchly religious days there is a definite sense of moral consequence for Dorian.
The one character who truly takes religion seriously is Mrs Arbuthnot in A Woman of No Importance, but she makes it appear dull and even turns it into a selfish act by using it as a form of escape from her misery.
The Puritan that preaches moral behaviour is considered to be a novelty and not really taken seriously by society.
The disregard for religion could explain much of the triviality in the lives of he characters, as they are all living without any sense of direction or purpose.
In an initial reading it could easily be assumed that The Importance of Being Earnest is devoid of any sober content and that to find a serious meaning would be impossible.
However, a large part of the play's meaning lies in its lack of seriousness.
According to Christopher Nasser in Into the Demon Universe, the target of fun isn't just Victorian society, but all of Wilde's work up until that point.
The two most prominent words in the play are 'nonsense' and 'serious' , which are appropriate as the play can be described as a reduction of all seriousness to the level of nonsense.
It can also be described as a self-parody as he laughs at every serious thought he has ever presented and implies that it is all ridiculously harmless by destroying the intellectual content.
By identifying this very original idea we can read a far deeper meaning from the play, resulting in its transcendence above the apparently frothy content.
In writing a 'trivial comedy for serious people', he is actually trivialising all the ideas he had presented in previous works.
In this sense the play is a private joke, but it is appealing to the audience through Wilde's ability to translate it into public terms.
Many of Wilde's plays are based on earlier works, but The Importance of Being Earnest is different in that it addresses elements of nearly all of them.
He was a Socialist and in 1891 wrote The Soul Of Man Under Socialism.
Here, he insisted that a healthy material base and equality of opportunity for all was necessary in order to form a liberal democratic society.
He advocated the abolition of private property and attempted to gain the support of the aristocracy by saying "property not only has duties, but has so many duties that its possession to any large extent is a bore".
A discussion about property between two characters in the play results in Lady Bracknell claiming that "land has ceased to be either a profit or a pleasure", as it "gives one position, and prevents one from keeping it up".
Wilde had thought that the poverty of the lower classes poisoned the lives of the rich, but he easily rejects this idea in the play.
The dismissal is exemplified as Algy says "if the lower classes don't set us a good example, what on earth is the use of them?
They seem, as a class, to have absolutely no sense of moral responsibility".
However, he isn't really being serious, and none of the characters are particularly bothered about the existence of the lower classes.
Wilde sends up the aristocracy's wealth by implying that none of them actually have any money, and live most of their lives in debt.
Algy talks of being "more than usually hard up" and hints at the unpaid tabs when Lane cannot buy cucumbers, even for "ready money".
Even worse, Jack is nearly arrested when he is unable to pay a vast restaurant bill.
Wilde has trivialized his ideological ideas through the characters total lack of interest in such matters.
Nasser points out that the idea of determinism is heavily considered in The Picture of Dorian Gray, but in The Importance of Being Earnest the serious idea of whether or not man can control his future seems trivial.
Algy discovered that his future didn't wait for him to bring it about, but actually occurred without him as Cecily decided upon their engagement months before he had even met her.
Rather than feeling uncomfortable with this, he is perfectly happy to join in her fantasy, supposedly acting it out for the rest of his life.
Wilde also cleverly addresses the issue of determinism through the structure of the play, advancing the comedy as he does so.
An example of this is in a conversation between Jack and Algy, as one says "Cecily and Gwendolen are perfectly certain to be extremely great friends" and the reply is "Women only do that after they've called each other a lot of other things first".
In this case a discussion in the first act predicts the outcome in the second.
Should Dorian Gray's secret double life have been discovered then it would have been considered shocking and no doubt have led to social ruin.
This story is massively trivialised as Jack and Algy don't suffer any consequences from the exposure of their own double lives.
For both of them, their true self is their wicked self, as the facades drop when they go 'Bunberrying'.
When they are eventually found out there is no punishment, instead they are actually rewarded as they get what they want - marriage.
The fiancés are able to consider the deceit endearing and the men revel in it.
Indeed, Algy had already dismissed any opinion on the severity of his actions, claiming "I love scrapes.
They are the only things that are never serious" and that "The truth is rarely pure and never simple.
Modern life would be very tedious if it were either, and modern literature a complete impossibility!".
Jack even complains that "it is a terrible thing for a man to find out suddenly that all his life he has been speaking nothing but the truth", and the audience is made to laugh at the scene even more when he turns to Gwendolen and asks "can you forgive me?.
Wilde is able to dismiss the moral tragedy of Dorian with total ease, therefore reducing him to a farce.
Wilde wrote De Profundis in 1905, and in it he claimed to have had summed up "all existence in an epigram".
A prominent idea in The Picture of Dorian Gray is that epigrams and paradoxes have the power to corrupt.
The Importance of Being Earnest trivialises this as it is crammed full with piquant epigrams, yet they can be separated from the narrative, so leaving little effect on the lives of the characters.
It is famed for its hilarious nonsense, provided by all members of the cast.
The wit isn't always completely harmless as there is potential for corruption in such phrases as "Divorces are made in heaven".
If Henry had said that to Dorian then there could have been damaging results, but Jack and Algy are able to remain unaffected.
Wilde trivialises the comic superiority of Henry with the idea that wit exists merely because it is perfectly phrased.
When Algy uses one of Henry's epigrams - "All women become like their mothers.
That is their tragedy.
No man does.
That's his", in effect he dismisses it by saying "It is perfectly phrased!
And quite as true as any observation in life should be".
Wilde also trivialises the serious danger of Henry.
He is meant to be the meddling devil but is replaced by Lady Bracknell, who is described as a "gorgon".
By the end of the play her interfering proves to be harmless.
The insatiable hunger in Salome that ended so dramatically is also dismissed as nonsense.
Wilde portrays greed as a trivial vice as Algy scoffs food again and again, turning it into a farce by eating all of Lady Bracknell's cucumber sandwiches and squabbling over muffins.
Jack runs up the massive restaurant bill and yet still neither of them suffer any consequences.
A Woman of No Importance is ridiculed for its immense sentimentality when Jack confuses Miss Prism for his mother.
Behind the emotional extremes in the play there were undertones of incest and this was trivialised in the embrace between them as it has amusing sexual overtones.
As well as satirizing his own works, Wilde may also be poking fun at the highly emotive traditional Victorian novels that were based on complicated, turbulent and highly moral tales.
The Importance of Being Earnest offered a lighter kind of entertainment.
This ridicule can be recognised in the dramatically earnest language used by the characters, often in conjunction with paradoxes such as "If you are not too long, I will wait for you all my life".
As well as using The Importance of Being Earnest to satirize society and his own work, Wilde implements it as a tool to hit back at his critics.
Some people said that his works were pieces of frothy nonsense and nothing more, which anyone could write.
He mocks them when Jack attempts some literary criticism, and Algy retorts "You should leave that to people who haven't been to university.
They do it so well in the daily papers!".
Miss Prism is created in response to the hypocritical critics that called it an immoral play.
She is a pious woman intent on morality and improvement, especially in literature.
She frequently claims earnest yet ridiculous things, such as the study of German grammar being an "intellectual pleasure".
However, she eagerly throws all that away without any consideration in order to be with Chasuble.
By doing this Wilde shows how trivial he thinks the 'serious' critics are.
All this exemplifies the way in which Oscar Wilde made full and creative use of his idea that "We should treat all the trivial things in life very seriously and all the serious things of life with sincere and studied triviality".
It strikes me as ironic that Wilde's work is taken so seriously by English Literature students today, studiously slaving over his deliberate trivialising of important issues, while critics of the day trivialised the importance of his contribution to literature.
Clearly he wanted his trivialising to be taken seriously, rather than his seriousness trivialised.
During the Victorian era women were considered to be suitably inferior to men; physically, intellectually and even spiritually.
They were perceived as being merely driven by emotion and not reason.
In this sense, women who had to work were paid less than men, and those who didn't work at all were reliant on a husband, a father or perhaps some generous male relative for any financial support.
Women were victims of this patriarchal society and perhaps this is why Barbara Bodichon states so strongly that women held no importance or status in Victorian society, other than dutifully fulfilling the role of wife and mother and becoming the property of the their husbands.
Bodichon herself was a victim of this society's rules and expectations regarding women, yet she did not submit herself or conform to them, rather Bodichon challenged and confronted, campaigning for women's rights and even set up the first women's suffrage committee 1866.
Strong women like Bodichon were voicing their protests throughout the Victorian period and this has been reflected in much of the literature written during this time.
The typical stereotype of a woman was starting to change, or at least writers were beginning to challenge the original idea and develop it further.
This was not particularly drastic or noticeable initially but it does suggest that people were aware that women were potentially just as powerful as men, if given the chance.
Yet more commonly found amongst the presentation of female characters or voices are those that were controlled or dominated by men.
It is possible to identify this portrayal of women from a range of genres, including poetry as well as in the novel.
Robert Browning's dramatic monologues are especially good indications of this, such as, My Last Duchess, and, Porphyria's Lover; Charles Dickens' novel, Great Expectations, also offers examples of women who are conforming to both the explicit and implicit conventions of their gender.
Both My Last Duchess and Porphyria's Lover are in the form of dramatic monologues, a technique often attributed to Browning.
Though Browning by no means invented the form, he has made a significant impact upon it by using it in such an extensive and varied way.
It was certainly a popular and continuously developing form amongst the Victorians.
It gave the opportunity for the writer to temporarily separate themselves from their work, giving a voice to someone else, conveying instead not their own personal thought and feelings but another, usually that of a famous character in History.
The monologue provides the writer with a position where they can remain detached with almost an escape from responsibility for the content.
Through this detachment the poet can still subtly persuade the reader and influence their opinions.
The form of My Last Duchess is kept incredibly regular with 28 rhyming couplets.
Yet due to the enjambment where each line seems to just flow onto the next, Browning makes sure the rhyme is there for emphasis only and not to provide a regular rhythm.
This gives the tone of the poem a conversational one, which is in fact exactly the intention Browning want to create.
Especially as that is what is occurring during the poem.
A Duke is having a conversation with a visitor to his palace, recalling the memory of his previous wife, the memory of her triggered by her portrait.
The portrait itself is an item that belongs to the Duke but it is clear through his recollection of the Duchess that she too was just a possession to him.
The very opening line of the poem, 'That's my last Duchess...'  indicates this idea of possession, and the reader is already beginning to wonder just how many predecessors did she have?
The possibility of their being more than one is probably quite accurate, and this creates the impression that these women were easily disposable to the Duke, they are devalued.
This reflects perfectly the materialistic, obsessive nature of the Duke, who wants to possess not only material possessions but also a human being.
This obsessive nature is the trigger for spurring his jealously when he believes her to be flirting and believes her to be, He is even angered by the idea that she does not value his heritage or perhaps more specifically, '...nine-hundred-years old name' .
His compulsion to own her and control her is even noticeable through the structure of the poem.
As mentioned earlier, the entire monologue is based around the rhyming couplets; there is not one deviation or exception from this.
It is utterly controlled, just like she is.
His power over her is reflected in the poem, and once the reader becomes aware of this Browning reveals how the Duke finally rids himself of a wife altogether, This sinister line reinforces the Dukes attitude that if he cannot own her, then no man shall, though what he does not understand is that no human life can ever be 'owned'.
There is such a clear lack of spontaneity or passion in his actions, the fact that he just gave a command and the deed was done makes the crime even more cold hearted.
It also demonstrates the Duke's corrupt use of this power; here perhaps Browning is condemning this corruption amongst the courts.
This is the reason too that the reader disregards the Duke's point of view, and supports and sympathises with the Duchess, acknowledging her innocence.
The Last Duchess is a clear example of how a woman was perceived as an object or an item to be possessed.
She is only ever mentioned through her portrait, she is never given a name or any kind of identity.
There is certainly a clear consequence from this treatment, though it only appears to effect her, the Duke seems to be void of any consequence or moral conscience, he feels no remorse for his actions.
Porphyria's Lover is a similar example of the above.
Just as in My Last Duchess, Browning uses the structure of the form to convey the narrator's feelings and thought.
The stanzas contain 8 syllables with a repeated rhyme scheme of A, B, A, B, B.
However the extra line seems to turn what could be a straightforward rhythm into a slightly out of synch one which creates the tone of someone truing to convince or persuade the audience or reader.
This clearly does not have the desired effect on the reader; the male narrator remains nameless making it harder for the reader to relate or trust him, regardless of it being in the first person.
Instead Porphyria has the stronger identity, and although she is the victim, she holds the authority over the entire poem.
This lack of trust in the narrator becomes even more inevitable when the reader learns of how Porphyria is killed by her lover, Indicating such a profound mental instability, his mental state is horribly disillusioned.
There is a strong sense of denial and refusal to accept the reality after Porphyria's death.
He believes that her cheek, 'blushed bright'  when he kisses her.
It appears that in his world, he can immortalise Porphyria through her death, capturing her in the moment when she belongs just to him, Just as the Duke wants to do, when he refers to her painting, '...as if she were alive'  Again the reader is introduced to this idea of ownership and male authority, 'That moment she was mine'  he does not hesitate to speak for her, assuming he knows her mind, what she is thinking and feeling.
These two dramatic monologues by Browning depict a male's notion of possessing a female.
The male characters in these texts, 'objectify, use and abuse' the woman by forcing their own wishes upon her.
Yet in both cases the men who do so do not achieve the approval or acceptance of the reader.
Instead it seems to have the opposite effect, perhaps Browning, through the disguise of another voice is indeed condemning this view and asking the reader to do the same.
This would suggest that the typical role of women as the property of men was being implicitly challenged.
However though the poems reveal and suggest a little about the way gender was constructed and perceived amongst the Victorians, Browning does not explicitly suggest any concept regarding the 'office' of a woman, apart from the Duchess which only applies to Bodichon's idea that the only important office for women was that of sovereignty.
To explore Bodichon's statement further, it is necessary to use a more in-depth and complex text which provides the content and examples of several female characters to analyse.
In Dickens novel, Great Expectations, it is possible to find a range of typical female stereotypes alongside those who don't quite achieve the expected social norms of the time.
The simplest division between them appears to be class.
Miss Havisham and her protégé Estella who are upper class with considerable wealth or in fact as Pip describes as, '...immensely rich' whereas Biddy and Mrs Joe Gargery are clearly amongst those classified as the working class.
This distinction separates the characters into pairs, but actually each woman is entirely different, each having an equally significant effect on Pips life.
This could be due to the absence of a strong male role model, which Mr. Joe Gargery just doesn't quite fulfil.
Dickens describes him as a, Not quite the character that can easily stand and battle against the strong, dominating figure of Mrs. Joe.
It is not surprising therefore that Pip regards Joe as , '...a larger species of child...' .
Indeed there is a significant lack of any kind of strong male role model or any tender maternal one for that matter, in Pip's life.
Mrs. Joe's very introduction and description to the reader makes a striking contrast to Joe's and immediately implies that she is a woman who is so very unnaturally destined for the position as wife and mother, There is a clear reluctance coming from her character which screams her refusal to conform to Societies norms of female duties, This is such an unlikely and unconventional depiction of the stereotyped female role, though it is not just in her appearance where the reader discovers this abnormality, indeed in her treatment of Pip and Mr. Joe this can be seen.
Mrs. Joe has a strikingly violent nature, Pip mentions that he was, 'brought up by hand' and by this, the reader acknowledges that this refers to some kind of physical abuse, confirmed when, 'Tickler' is revealed to be a stick with which he is beaten.
Joe too is not exempt from this, indeed once Pip has a beating; Joe is likely to receive one as well, The role that Mrs. Joe seems to perform throughout most of the novel is the one usually taken upon the man of the household.
It was seen as the norm, during the Victorian era that men should be the dominant authoritative figures in the home and were the ones who were violent and inflicted abuse.
Dickens does the same with the character of Mrs. Havisham, another female who does not fit the 'model woman' of a Victorian society.
She does not marry, , and she is never a mother, or at least not in a biological sense, as she does eventually adopt Estella.
The very symbols of marriage, have actually become symbols of death, Miss Havisham is an isolated, solitary female who is imprisoned within her own home, within her own memory of the past.
Decay and death seem to seep straight from her, as if she were indeed a corpse.
Her pure hatred for men is so overpowering that she recruits Estella, a young and impressionable girl who soon learns that she is required to avenge this withered elderly woman, and reward her with the satisfaction of seeing someone else suffer the same heartbreak as she did.
Miss Havisham spends her time destroying the innocence of a child, Pip, encouraging him to abandon his world with Joe and the forge and instead watches him develop a hunger for the refined upper class he perceives as the only way of capturing Estella's cold heart.
This portrayal of a woman who did not achieve the expectations of society is far from being, in any way a positive one, Dickens seems to be constantly reiterating the idea that those who do not achieve the norm do not lead a stable, happy life.
Therefore it would seem Bodichon's statement would coincide with Dickens view, that women cannot achieve any kind of high office unless it is sovereignty itself, simply due to the fact that if any other path is sort after, the result is not a favourable one.
Indeed this is reflected once more upon another of Dickens's female characters, Estella.
Just as Pip is very much an object in the eyes of Miss Havisham, Mrs. Joe and Estella, she too is also objectified by Miss Havisham.
Estella's very identity is stolen from her; she is shaped and moulded into the creature which Miss Havisham desires.
Dickens never reveals what Estella actually looks like, instead only supplying the reader with the vague and superficial, she is, 'beautiful and self possessed.'.
Even when Estella grows into a woman, Miss Havisham still retains an overwhelmingly obsessive control over her, However though she is controlled, Estella most certainly controls Pip.
Her influence over him is enormous, even after their first meeting Pip feels entirely differently about himself, realising for the first time that he is, Estella, like Miss Havisham is in a position of wealth, and therefore power.
She is a strong female but who also does not conform to the norm.
Her control and power over Pip is illustrated by the ease in which she lowers Pip's opinion of himself and of his most beloved relative and friend, Joe.
He feels continuously degraded and worthless when in her presence, even when she kisses him, a gesture of affection is turned sour and rendered meaningless, Estella's affect on Pip provides a most significant contrast when placed alongside the character of Biddy.
Like Pip, Biddy was an orphan and again, like Pip, she was, 'brought up by hand'.
Biddy is instrumental in the early education of Pip; she teaches him humility and respect for Joe and most importantly the true meaning of a loyal friendship.
In this sense Biddy is already showing signs of a new type of woman in Victorian society, one which is in no position of wealth but regardless is still in the position to be respected and admired and who is intellectually equal to that of a man.
The way in which Pip is immediately at ease and is himself is also quite a contrast to when he is in the company of Estella.
Pip describes Biddy as, '...never insulting, or capricious; she would have derived only pain, and no pleasure, from giving me pain.'
There is a noticeable change with Biddy's appearance within the novel, initially when Biddy is running her Grandmother's shop Dickens portrays her with, Yet when Biddy moves on from the shop and takes on the role as carer for Mrs. Joe, Joe and Pip, Dickens makes sure the reader acknowledges the change, Dickens here is perhaps being rather subtle; when Biddy begins to start taking on the normal position expected of her as a woman, her appearance instantly grows more attractive and acceptable.
Indeed this is not the only dramatic change the reader will notice occurring within other female characters.
After surviving her brutal attack, Mrs. Joe completely reverts to a more normal gender role, '...her temper was greatly improved and she was patient.'
.
To conclude, it would appear that what Dickens is suggesting is that for those women who do not conform to the explicit and implicit expectations of society, instead choosing the reverse of their gender roles, the result is simply violence and chaos.
This disorder is soon resolved when there is a return to the norm.
In this respect it is possible to understand that amongst early Victorian society and literature, there was a very fixed understanding of how each gender should behave, and what positions in society are acceptable to them.
Within the poetry of Browning these gender norms appear to be challenged, and perhaps confronted in order to raise awareness of the possibility of equality amongst men and women.
Where Browning is aware of this possibility, Dickens seems very much convinced that the conception of the 'ideal woman' is there to guide those women in Victorian society to ensure they do not deviate, and experience the consequences deviation could incur.
Barbara Bodichon most likely is reflecting an entirely accurate portrayal of how the Victorians perceived women and the attitude which was held against them.
However to say that there is no important office for woman apart from that of Sovereign is perhaps a little closed minded, it suggests that the role of a wife or that of a mother is inferior and holds no status, where in fact it is perhaps the most essential to not only family, but to society as well.
In a collection of poems entitled Why Brownlee Left , Irish poet Paul Muldoon included the sonnet 'October 1950,'in which he writes about his own conception: This deliberation over subjectivity, technology and place is not new to contemporary literature.
Victorian society was fractured by social, political and scientific upheavals, through the proliferation of scientific material, notably Charles Darwin's The Origin of the Species , which prompted religious doubt, the periodic economic depression inflicted by the Corn Laws passed in 1815 and the passing of the Reform Act in 1832, allowing the industrial middle class to vote.
These rapid changes created instabilities that threatened an individual's sense of their social identity and it seems this dilemma of the self has extended into the zeitgeist of contemporary literature, as Steven Connor highlights "the novel is [still] central to modern societies, in that it dramatises the process of integrating self-formation."
In response to this, I will examine how social identity is constructed through the politics of space and place in Charles Dickens Great Expectations , Alan Warner's Morvern Callar  and Jeanette Winterson's The Powerbook  In his Great Expectations  Charles Dickens writes the bildungsroman of the protagonist Pip.
It is a novel of growth* depicting the boys search for identity and exploring the Renaissance trope of self-fashioning.
The novel opens to reveal Pip in the marshes among the gravestones of his deceased parents and brothers.
Against the backdrop of the wild, unpopulated and unclaimed Kent marshes, he forges his own identity when he states 'I called myself Pip."
By establishing Pip and the other young adults in the novel as orphans, Dickens allowed his readers, who had been bereft of old traditions, to commiserate with this lost identity.
The orphan was equated with an 'unauthored' identity that goes in search of authority in an attempt to 'authorize the plot of his ensuing life."
Linked to this ideal of authority is the father figure.
Psychoanalyst Anny Sadrin believes Pip is " a Telemachus figure: a male orphan who has to redeem his father's death and return to his origins.
So the 'true' ending of Great Expectations is Pip's return to the parental graves, and his story is about his mistakes in projecting his paternal ideal."
His attempts to construct his personality are prompted through a Lacanian lack of his parent's identity when he gleans their character traits from the 'shape of the letters' on their tombstones.
Interestingly, I am reminded of Saussurian signifying systems when Pip relates; 'from the character and turn of the inscription, 'Also Georgiana Wife of the Above,' I drew a childish conclusion that my mother was freckled and sickly."
Accordingly, his sense of separateness and his 'first most vivid and broad impression of the identity of things' are established on his meeting with, would-be father, Magwitch, who suddenly appears from behind his father's grave.
His social identity dilemma then arises from misinterpreting paternal figures like Miss Havisham and Wemmick and being confused by characters assuming the role of stepfather; like Mr Pumblechook.
Interestingly, Charles Dickens own relationship with his father was fraught with instability and disappointment.
His father repeatedly led the family into debt, eventually ending in his imprisonment in Marshalsea prison, with Dickens being forced to work in a blacking warehouse.
These early experiences traumatised the young Dickens and propelled his literary ambitions.
The parallels between Dickens own life and the bildungsroman of Pip in Great Expectations are striking in their similarity.
It is entirely possible that Magwitch is the embellished literary form of Dickens father, for it is Magwitch who propels Pip towards the realisation of his great expectations and social identity.
Interestingly, in the Twentieth Century Fox production of Great Expectations  directed by Alfonso Cuaron, the young Pip encounters Magwitch not by the gravestones, but when examining his reflection in the shallow waters of the marshes he notices the convict hiding underneath, as if revealing an older mirror image of himself.
Linked to this is the notion of naming.
The parent names a child and in this action forms the fundamental basis of the child's subjectivity.
Christopher Morris concurs that "Pip's preoccupations with names...all point to Pip's own basic lack of an autonomous self."
On the marshes Pip is free to let his social identity evolve naturally.
However, when placed in Sattis House and London, other social identities are forced upon him.
Estella feeds him ' as if I were a dog in disgrace' Interestingly, on meeting Pip in the marshes Magwitch demands him to 'give us your name' as if it were a physical handle that can be taken off and on like a piece of clothing.
Despite Magwitch's instructions as Pip's benefactor are that he must 'always bear the name of Pip,' Herbert quickly convinces him to change it to 'Handel."
Similarly, on his arrival in London Magwitch assumes the name 'Provis' because 'it's as good as another' and Mr Wopsle works under the name ' Mr Waldengarver' at the theatre.
Perhaps these characters are influenced by the city itself because according to W.H.
Auden "the lonely are battered slowly like pebbles into fortuitous shapes[by the city.]"
Indeed, Wemmick divides his social identity between his work for Mr Jagger's in London and his country residence the 'castle.'
Dickens employs the first person narrative to convey the inner thoughts of young Pip.
As a result, the reader is able to witness the slow formation of Pip's social identity, as he experiences Lacan's definition of inner and outer reality when he reveals 'I and my conscience showed ourselves' and during his illness ' I confounded impossible existences with my own identity."
It exists as an entity apart from himself.
In contrast, the motif of hands that runs throughout the novel is perhaps symbolic of social realities and identities interweaving.
Mr Jagger's obsessive-compulsive hand washing is a negative response to the crowds of people that wait outside his office; he does not like his social reality being invaded.
Whilst, the joining of Pip and Estella's hands at the end of the novel is not only reminiscent of Milton's Paradise Lost but also symbolic of divided social identities being united among the neutral space of the ruins of Sattis House.
The cyclical motion of events suggests that Dickens believes place is irrelevant in forming the social identity.
In truth, identity is manufactured and maintained by interpellation within society and Pip must find his place among the social strata of Joe and Estella.
As Eiichi Hara highlights "the human psyche simply locates itself within a range of subject positions already available within society's language and ideology."
Like Dickens, Alan Warner constructs Morvern in Morvern Callar  as an orphan and writes her in the first person.
However, unlike Pip who readily shares his emotions and ambitions, Morvern's character is decidedly nihilistic.
Her detached and dispassionate language leave the character to act as a vacuum that reflects the equally vacuous dull world around her.
Cristie March is keen to show that whilst Warner "glorifies and rusticates the Highlands ...[he] also represents to the reader a 'weirding' of the landscape as socio-cultural and technological change infiltrate the environment."
This evidently impacts upon Morvern's social identity and Wallace and Stevenson highlight the damaged identity common to Scottish Literature is expressed through " a failure to find - or accept- self-fulfilment in education, work, emotional relationships; [and] inarticulacy."
Indeed, " in Scottish novels...protagonists, are rarely, if ever, in control of their existences, and [are] morbidly aware of the fact."
However, we are reminded of Samuel Beckett's Happy Days  in the openness of her simplistic language and linear narrative, which suggest a child that has yet to form her social identity.
Morvern makes two key ethical decisions that shape her social identity.
The first is her decision not to report the death of her boyfriend and the second is the theft of his novel and essentially his identity when she puts her name on the manuscript.
In this act, Warner is perhaps exploring Roland Barthes 'the death of the author' hypothesis, in which he argues that the author cannot claim any absolute authority over his or her text because 'to give a text an Author is to impose a limit on that text, to furnish it with a final signified.'
Warner experiments with these ideas both in the title and content of the novel.
Not only does the male author distance himself by constructing a female character, but also the name itself, Morvern Callar, is asexual and genderless.
By confusing issues of gender Warner is able to lend existential qualities to his protagonist and he is able to limit extra-diegetic interaction and therefore prevent her social identity being formed in relation to the author.This gender confusion is extended to Morvern's preoccupation with names.
She plays with the construction of identity by nicknaming her stepfather 'Red Hanna' and her co-workers 'Tequila Sheila,' 'Smugslug' and ' Creeping Jesus."
Whilst, these names deny the character's true identity, she foregrounds the lack of her boyfriend's name by referring to him as 'He."
The capitalization is usually reserved for references to God and is suggestive of a divine authorship or father figure status in Morvern's life.
Indeed, the large age gap between the two could perhaps be construed as Oedipal re-enaction of a father and daughter relationship.
Morvern, like the characters created by Jeannette Winterson, is detached from the body she occupies and her ritualistic toe painting, smoking and obsession with clothes are not simply a preoccupation with the teen culture but an attempt to integrate her inner and outer reality.
Ironically, this disjointed sense of self allows her to interact with the corpse of her dead boyfriend without ethical dilemma; 'what you do is divide the limbs and wrap them in a good few layers of bin liner.'
Accordingly, Warner implements poststructuralist concerns with the limitations of language.
If we are confined within the symbolic order of language dictated by society, our sense of social identity is contained within the selected discourses available to us.
In Baktinian terms our 'heteroglossia' limits the construction of our social identity.
Perhaps in defiance of this Morvern seems to refuse this narrative economy.
She does not speak until page eighteen of the novel and she acknowledges 'it was the first time I'd spoke that day' even though it is now evening.
Ironically, we learn the etymology of her name in Spanish means 'silence' and she only seems truly free when not partaking in discourse.
Indeed, many readers are isolated by the Scottish dialect Warner uses throughout the novel.
Instead of crying Morvern 'greets,' she refers to potatoes as 'tatties' and the elision and lack of grammar in the prose convey her working class discourse.
This elision leaves an undercurrent of inexplicable silences throughout the novel, which are perhaps Warner's exploration of the Lacanian 'Real.'
Morvern is experiencing an 'other' reality that exists outside her idiolect.
Unable to express herself verbally, Morvern turns to her compilation tapes to convey her emotions and express herself.
Perhaps then our sense of self can be expressed more fully in the space of technology.
Indeed, Morvern attempts to reconstruct her social identity by moving to Spain and taking part in the raves.
Through the technology of music she is temporarily able to fulfil her Lacanian lack and find freedom because 'you didn't really have your body as your own, it was part of the dance, the music, the rave."
Warner was praised by critics for his portrayal of the "profound anomie of the rave scene" but he is keen to highlight that "such a lifestyle results in a flattening of experience" and all the while she chooses to listen to the music of her dead boyfriend because the rave culture is real no substitute for the emotional void in her life.
Eventually she must return to her roots, like Pip, and confront her true social identity, indeed Warner extends this search into the sequel These Demented Lands  where Morvern goes to visit the island where her foster mother's grave lies.
Like Morvern, Jeanette Winterson is aware of the discrepancies between the fragmented inner 'I' and the ideal outer 'I,' the de-centred self.
She is conscious that 'the one life we think we know, is only the window that is open on the screen."
With a lack of symbolic language to describe those other windows, she questions; 'how do you write me to myself?"
She draws on this idea of the potential freedom to be found through technology in The PowerBook  Through a series of fantasies mapped out on a laptop Winterson explores the boundaries and liminalities of gender and nomadic identity.
These concerns are perhaps linked intimately to Winterson's own identity.
Having run away from home at the age of sixteen because her parents did not support her lesbian identity, Winterson was forced to construct her social identity in the absence of authorial authority, In contrast to Pip in Great Expectations who searches for his ordained place in society in order to stabilize and ensure its continuation, Winterson creates characters who rebel against the process of interpellation in search of their own personal, psychological identity.
She questions how well can we ever really know ourselves and in response to this she offers a new set of politics by which to construct social identity.
She constructs love affairs dotted through time and space, 'in the sixteenth century,' at 'the train station' and in 'Paris,' in order to stress that social identity is not formed through one's environment, 'place doesn't matter' neither does time because ' there is no past, present or future, only simultaneous layers of reality."
She also finds that names are irrelevant to identity.
Winterson creates many characters all different and yet all produced by the same consciousness.
She shares Barthes preoccupation with the author by sporadically establishing extra-diegetic interaction asking; 'did I write this story, or was it you, writing through me?"
She experiences 'a loss of control' as the 'script now writes itself.'
Certainly Winterson too is acutely aware of the Lacanian jouissance that drives our search for social identity; 'I think it is fair to say that my parents were not loved a children, that they did not love each other and that they did not love me.
There was possession, fear, sentimentality, desire, but not love.
This has left me with certain absences."
If our sense of self is more defined by a sense of lack than presence, can the novel ever encompass this fractured subjectivity?
Winterson seems to be exploring this anomaly when she hopes 'my name would contain me, but the sound itself seemed to run off my tongue, and drop, letter by letter, into a pool at my feet."
Like in Great Expectations, a name then becomes a physical entity separate from its owner.
Instead she postulates that autonomy can only be achieved when we are able to assert our multiple identities, love is the vehicle that allows us to explore and enact those personalities because 'love is a door in a blank wall."
Interestingly then, Winterson suggests that cyberspace is the last avant-garde frontier where you are able to ' take off your body,' welcome our Cartesian egos, solipsistic beliefs and enjoy a new freedom by embracing a new cyber consciousness, where 'you can change the story' because 'you are the story.'
In conclusion, the similarities of opinion concerning the politics that construct social identity, expressed by the examined authors, suggest that the construction of the self may have fallen into cultural stasis.
Indeed, Bergonzi highlights "no matter how unflinchingly the novelist may try to deal with wholly new kinds of experience, he cannot escape being influenced by the novels that have been written before him."
Indeed if Foucault's speculations on the limitations of symbolic language prove to be true, it seems impossible to believe that new dimensions of space and place can produce unique avant-garde examples of social identity, without new discourse to support them.
Perhaps it is time to put aside the Lawrencian view that social identity is formed through "responding to the world that was timeless and absolute."
and return instead to Keat's idea of Negative Capability "when man is capable of being in uncertainties, Mysteries, doubts, without any irritable reaching after fact and reason" and realise our understanding of social identity rests on the acceptance that "human subjectivities [are forever] slipping and sliding" between different discourses.
Like the contemporary moment, can we ever truly know our social identity in all its indefinable and mutable glory?
The Waste Land is both an apocalyptic vision and perversely difficult attack on the modern world.
Several theoretical approaches can aid our interpretation of the complex and obscure images that pervade the text.
Davidson argues that; 'The poem's lack of thematic clarity and careful refusal of connections between images, scenes and voices make it particularly open to different interpretations."
Divergent and somewhat contradictory readings allow the text to be explored from manifold angles.
The plurality of approaches available ensures that there is no one correct method of elucidation that 'makes sense' of the poem's bleak and disturbing thematic content.
Eliot's preoccupation with death dominates much of the poem's thematic content.
Death manifests itself in numerous forms and has both a literal and metaphorical presence, representing the death of society and morality.
The distinction between life and death is blurred throughout, as death becomes an integral part of life; 'I was neither living nor dead."
This echoes the epigraph, in which a prophetess desires only death to end her entrapment in the eternal present.
Past and future are indecipherable in The Waste Land.
Tiresias embodies this contradiction as Spender believes that he; 'connects the fragments of civilisation scattered through time and space."
April therefore becomes the; 'cruellest month,' as the confusion between; 'memory and desire,' leaves the inhabitants of post-war Europe wishing for the merciful oblivion of a; 'forgetful snow."
Present tense verbs such as; 'breeding' and 'stirring,' allow Eliot to express the stagnant, motionless nature of their lives.
A Formalist reading of the text allows us to understand how the poem's cyclic and repetitive structure is created through reoccurring images and allusions.
Williams justly describes its structure as; 'more simultaneous than developing."
Eliot draws on images from the work of Baudelaire, Dante and Blake to impart the repetitive ennui that traps those who live there ;'I see crowds of people, walking round in a ring."
The poem's lack of linear direction implies that there is no escape from the wasteland; without structural progression the reader too becomes lost there.
The dehumanisation and isolation that arises from mass urbanisation, deprives people of their individuality and spirituality.
Images such as; 'the dead tree gives no shelter,' help convey the desolation and melancholic nature of this world.
The elegiac tone implies that the poem is a metaphorical funeral for European civilisation.
The Formalist emphasis on the importance of defamilierization facilitates our examination of Eliot's ability to manipulate the symbolic properties of water and make the conventional appear alien.
Eliot's presentation of polluted, dirty water perverts its life-giving properties thus distorting water's traditional connotations.
Water becomes a paradox, connected to both sterility and fertility, as prostitutes 'wash their feet,' in malignant and pernicious soda water.
Whilst there are many parallels between Formalism and Structuralism, Structuralism is of greater use in allowing us to examine the nature of the binary.
Structuralism is concerned with deciphering the underlying binary articulated within the poem's linguistic codes.
The Structuralist emphasis on binary oppositions allows us to examine the thematic contrasts within the poem.
According to Levi-Strauss, it is the grammar logic within a myth that provides the symbolic structure that allows us to understand them.
In applying this principle to our examination of The Waste Land, the preoccupation with dryness and sterility therefore defines all that water can promise; life and regeneration.
Levi-Strauss believed that binary oppositions explain and reduce a contradiction, and, in a poem filled with contradiction, Structuralism provides an effective way to penetrate the poem's dense and abstruse imagery.
The Formalist assertion that texts exist in a vacuum detracts from its value as a theoretical approach here as it would be inappropriate to ignore the era's social influences.
Cultural Materialism provides an insight into the poem's thematic concerns by emphasising the need to understand its historical context.
For example, the disruption that permeates the poem's structure is used to mirror the horror and violence of the contemporary battlefield.
The Modernist threat to the boundaries of art destabilised the definition and limitations of poetry.
Abrupt syntactic shifts confound the poem's underlying insecurity and reflect this ambiguity.
The Waste Land is a compendium of literary and mythical allusions.
The poem's intertextuality stems from its network of encyclopaedic allusions that highlight the permanency of man's eternal failure to improve himself.
Davidson views allusions as; 'a dispersive figure, multiplying contexts for both the present work and the text alluded to, suggesting a cultural, historical dimension of difference."
Esoteric prophetic voices and biblical allusions create a moral lyricism and intensity that lends authority to the poem.
Eliot successfully conveys the inescapable nature of the past by having the reader's movement around the wasteland haunted by the voices of other writers.
The divergent nature of these allusions dislocate history and geography, adding to the reader's disorientation.
I believe Structuralism to be the most appropriate method of examining the relationship between allusion and meaning because it regards language as a self-referential system.
Structuralism allows us to centralise language in a poem where it is in danger of sliding into indeterminacy.
Eliot himself viewed poetry as a site of difficulty where language must be dislocated before it can make sense, believing that; 'The poet must become ..more allusive, more indirect, in order to force..language into his meaning."
Meaning is therefore not inherent in words but given by structure; the allusive and oblique structure of The Waste Land forces language to make meaning.
Allusions therefore deploy a relationship between word and image that creates meaning.
The significance of certain surreal sound effects such as; 'jug jug jug jug,' only become apparent when put into their allusive context.
Successive allusions to Philomel's rape re-iterate the theme of assaulted innocence and danger of lust.
In juxtaposing Spenser's idealised depiction of love with images of sordid modern sex in the third section, Eliot succeeds in showing; 'how man's aspirations to a spiritual mode of living are thwarted by his subversive bodily appetites,' according to Macrae.
The meaning of certain allusions are therefore only revealed through their relationships with other images.
Eagleton is therefore just in stating that; 'Images do not have a 'substantial' meaning, only a 'relational' one.
You do not need to go outside the poem..to explain them; they explain and define each other."
The poem's equivocal imagery betrays the influence of Symbolism, as Eliot uses allusions to evoke elusive moods and states of minds.
Language is used to form complex allusive networks that challenge the reader to explore the cryptic connections between them.
Man's emotional paralysis is explored through Eliot's unsettling portrayal of relationships.
The apathetic mechanistic relationship between the typist and clerk reveals how sex has become violent and reductive;'She smoothes her hair with automatic hand."
The mechanical rhyme between; 'stare' and 'millionaire,' reflects the monotonous predictability of their rhythm.
Mr Eugenides' possible proposition of another man reveals xenophobic and anti-Semitic undertones that expose Eliot's unsettling class and racial politics.
Crawford believes that 'cities that traditionally used to promote fertility occur ironically in The Waste Land, punctuating its infertile.. world where previous rituals and beliefs seem to be lapsing into futility."
The unsettlingly perverse and possibly necrophilic image of dead 'white bodies naked' heaped upon each other supports this, implying that nothing pure or fertile can arise from sex between metaphorically and spiritually dead beings.
Ornate, decorative language in the 'Game of Chess' creates an artificiality that exposes the essential emptiness of modern life.
Eliot's convoluted syntax and complex verbosity draws us into the woman's confusion.
Enjambment and sparse punctuation creates her breathless hysteria allowing us too to be; 'troubled, confused and drowned the sense in orders."
Board and accustomed to her questions, the man sees no point in replying.
The absence of inverted commas in his responses suggests that we are overhearing his thoughts.
This macabre, flippant resignation reveals an unsettling lack of communication between the sexes.
Disturbing allusions to Philomel re-iterate the theme of male dominance; in refusing to speak he has the power to prolong her claustrophobic anxiety.
Ironically, her speech discloses a fear of the death and decay that already traps her.
The gruesome image of; 'pressing lidless eyes and waiting for a knock upon the door,' conveys the omnipresent inevitability of death.
The word 'lidless' implies that they can't escape or ignore its presence.
The barman's impatient call reminds us that time dictates and controls all people and classes; the 'Game of Chess' therefore becomes a metaphor for life.
The poem's dislocated vocalisation arises from continually changing pronouns and tenses that leave us uncertain of the gender, nationality and perspective of certain speakers.
A Bakhtinien reading of the poem aids us in understanding the hetroglossic nature of the text.
Bakhtin argues that; 'language, like the living concrete environment in which the consciousness of the verbal artist lives-is never unitary."
No central voice dominates the narration which makes it difficult to follow the poem's progression.
Eagleton justly argues that; 'The diverse divided materials of Eliot's poem are tamed to a coherent narrative, the shattered human subjects unified to a single ego,' as characters' voices merge and are diffused into one another.
Spender believes the voices are; 'symptoms of attitudes, reflexes, neuroses..there is one other voice-the voice of the poet in the poem who suffers."
Dialogue, monologue and fragmented streams of consciousness coexist confusingly to create the poem's textured pollyvocality.
The infiltration of foreign languages disorientates the reader, allowing us to share in the sense of displacement that stemmed from the absence of geographical stability in Europe.
This supports Pinkney's assertion that; 'Dialogoism insists that, on its way to the thematic object, one's own world has to enter into all kinds of interaction with alien words.'
Structuralist principals dictate that the relationship between language and literature is one of homology.
As a result, language can not be subordinated because it is what creates images and meaning in the poem.
Structuralism is more analytical than evaluative, primarily concerned with how meaning is produced.
Culler supports this arguing that; 'The type of literary study which Structuralism helps..would be a poetics that strives to define the conditions of meaning."
How images are created is therefore of more importance than what they signify.
The sinister; 'rattle of the bones, and chuckle spread from ear to ear' that mocks their futile lives, is created through tactile olfactory imagery and the onomatopoeic word 'rattle.'
The use of onomatopoeia proves that the choice of signifier isn't always arbitrary.
Imagery in the final section is enigmatic, disturbing and frustratingly complex.
In examining Eliot's use of signifiers rather than the signified, we can explore how images are created, thus gaining an insight into the; 'psychological character of our sound images."
Eliot pioneered the objective correlative, through which an author can convey emotion directly to the reader by developing an image that delineates that emotion.
Nature therefore becomes a metaphor for humanity, 'sunken' and 'limp,' desperate for both literal and spiritual regeneration.
Personification conveys that man and nature suffer the same suffocating thirst; 'Dead mountain mouth of carious teeth that cannot spit."
Crawford believes that; 'The Waste Land's sounds rather than sights, come closest to enacting... Eliot's 'auditory imagination.''
Repetition and alliteration in the line; 'Drip drop drip drop,' creates an auditory image of the non-existent water that shows how signifiers can create an almost real presence of the signified.
Structuralist principals allow us to examine how such a vivid mental representation of the desired water is evoked through certain signifiers.
This imparts how powerful the traveller's desperation is, supporting Saussure's belief that language is formative of our sense of reality.
The distinction between reality and illusion in this section is blurred.
The traveller suffers accumulated delusions, lost in the unnatural confusion between humanity and nature, plagued by nightmarish hallucinations such as those of; 'bats with baby faces.'
Deficient punctuation and images of painful discomfort make the reader long to be released from this torturous and interminable journey.
The desert represents a world without God where hope is illusory.
The absence of water implies that existence is pointless without the possibility of regeneration through eternal life; 'We who are living are now dying with a little patience."
Eliot questions; 'Who is the third who walks always beside you?"
only to present the reader with a figurative image of the grim reaper;'There is always another one walking beside you/ Gliding wrapt in a brown mantle, hooded."
This infers that infinite death alone replaces God and eternal life.
False prophets, spiritual impotence and a sense of loss traps; 'hooded hordes swarming over endless plains, stumbling in cracked earth."
Macrae offers an interesting and convincing alternative to this interpretation, believing the desert to represent atheist Communist Russia, offering; 'deluded prophecies to the blinded masses as they stumble in a spiritual dessert.... of the cycle of error and destruction in history.'
Coote believes the poem; 'ends with the narrator sitting amid the wreck of urban culture, threatened by madness and longing for the peace of God."
I disagree to an extent because the thunder does offer advice regarding a way forward, but Eliot leaves the decision to follow or reject the voice in the reader's hands.
The sinister repetition of;'London Bridge is falling down falling down falling down,' implicitly infers that man is destined to sink and fall continuously if he ignores this advice.
The ending's frustrating ambiguity is strengthened by Hieronymo's ambivalent and taunting voice.
The poem lacks closure, ending without a full stop which infers that there is no one solution to the problems presented.
This completes the poem's circular structure, as the paradoxical mocking irony that pervades the 'Burial of the dead,' is encapsulated in the image of the falling bridge.
The structure of The Waste Land has huge impact on how we interpret its images and meaning.
I therefore disagree with Stead who believes; ''texture' was all-important and 'structure' only a shadow,' in the poem.
Categorising the poem's structure and organisation proves problematic due to the lack of consistent meter, stress and rhyme.
American New Critics valued works that promoted unity of form and content, and regard the way the text disrupts and questions itself as a negative feature.
Initially, the five part division implies that Eliot may be constructing a tragedy, but the poem's flexibility rejects the constraints of such a style.
Amalgamation of form and technique suggests that its structure has a representative purpose, which is to reflect the new hybrid form of Europe.
Ward supports this, describing Eliot's method as a 'complex fusing process."
Williams believes his; 'logic of the imagination,' exposes a; 'controlling art behind apparent fragmentation."
Eliot's deviant versification allows him to modulate pace and intensity, which in turn creates a purposeful chaos that reflects the complexity of the Modernist world.
Williams believes that; 'mythological parallels help to establish a certain a-logical relation between the separate episodes of the poem."
In order to support this assertion, the reader would have to view the poem's framework of mythical references and allusions to Vegetation rites as an attempt to create a sense of continuity and ingrained pattern within its structure.
Emig disagrees, tracing the poem's fragmentation to; 'excessive use of metonymy which leads to a complex semantic network."
The Structuralist emphasis on linguistics therefore makes it the most effective approach to 'make sense' of the poem.
The Waste Land challenges and transcends the boundaries of both poetry and art .
It is above all, a pioneering example of Modernist literature that effortlessly captures the despair and disillusion of an age.
Using a theoretical approach to open the text creates a framework that allows the reader to make sense of a poem that deliberately rejects coherency.
I believe Structuralism to be the most effective way of stabilising its chaotic design due to its emphasis on the creation of meaning.
This emphasis ensures that the reader has to examine the inter-textual relationship between language, image and allusion, which leads to a deeper understanding of the poem's thematic content.
Structuralism allows us to use the poem's linguistic components to expose and unlock the concealed inferences within Eliot's perplexing and impervious images.
In using Structuralism to do this, Eliot's primary concern is revealed to be the decaying morality of the world he inhabits.
I therefore agree with Eagleton that; 'Structuralism seemed to make it  a window on the universal mind.'
Peter Barry writes that the 'essence' of structuralism 'is the belief that things cannot be understood in isolation - they have to be seen in the context of the larger structures they are part of'.
The body of text surrounding the extract and its genre must, then, be considered.
The monologue takes place in Act Five scene two of what might be regarded as one of Shakespeare's most powerful tragedies.
Roland Barthes's 'method of understanding' involves the employment of five codes.
'The symbolic code', 'consists of contrasts and pairings related to the most basic binary polarities'.
The selected extract is structured around a set of these binary opposites, which, when syntagmatically combined create a deep sense of emotional torment within the tragic hero.
In preparing himself to kill his wife, Othello uses many images of life such as, 'rose' ; 'vital growth' ; 'Balmy breath' .
These are surrounded by words and images of death: 'wither'  and 'monumental alabaster' .
This demonstrates conflict within the character himself.
Also very poignant are the contrasting images of warmth and cold.
Phrases such as 'Promethean heat'  and 'flaming minister' create a sense of heat and passion, whilst the candle suggests warmth and life.
However, the use of 'alabaster'  as a comparison suggests something cold and dead.
There are oppositions of colour; between dark and light which evoke issues perhaps to do with race and symbolically enhance other polarities within the monologue.
This opposition within the character Othello is 'summed up', in the oxymoronic lines: 'Heavenly' is the opposite of what weeping and sorrow should be; 'Othello believes he is acting out of love."
Reviewing the structure of the text in such a way, unveils the inner character of the protagonist.
By looking at the extract alone there are aspects of language which can be observed and used to create meaning on a basic level.
Like much of Shakespeare's work, the monologue is written in iambic pentameter.
This encourages a rhythm which emphasises significant words, thus evoking both mood and meaning.
The syntax used within the lines also aids this.
In the first line, for instance, the repeated word 'cause' is given natural emphasis from its place within the rhythmic pattern.
Moreover, the caesurae within the line suggest that the speaker  is in some kind of confused torment; the syntax used gives emphasis on the 'is' in the second part of the line.
A structuralist reading of these lines suggests justification.
However, since this 'cause' is not identified within the monologue itself, a complete understanding cannot be achieved without the context of the play.
The work of Claude Lévi - Strauss on the structure of the myth recognised that although there was no 'separate and inherent meaning', the text [the parole] could 'be understood by considering its position in the whole cycle ...'Othello is a tragedy in genre, and Othello the tragic hero.
Thus, like the myth, the play can be understood in terms of its genre.
By understanding Shakespearean tragedy it is possible to identify 'the cause' without the context of the play, as one of three things, as identified by Aristotle: revenge, ambition or de casibus.
The following lines confirm that it is the first that is driving Othello.
The tragic hero must embody certain attributes in order to make him tragic.
The most poignant of these is the tragic flaw, or folly, which takes hold of the protagonist.
Othello's folly is jealousy and by taking into account the play's genre it is possible to grasp a basic understanding of the nature of the play.
However, a structuralist reading on this level is limited and more detailed observations need to be made.
Taking into account both the surrounding text and the genre of the play, these first lines can be read in different ways.
Throughout the second half of the play Othello refers to justice.
The repetition of the phrase, 'It is the cause' , could be a reaffirmation of the reason behind his intentions.
A structuralist reading, which takes into account the binary structure might suggest that Othello is still protesting with himself.
The way in which he refuses to name the cause  suggests that the tragic hero cannot accept the thought of being separated from Desdemona by killing her.
Structuralism looks at texts as a 'structured set of signs which carries cultural meanings."
Barthes's third code, 'The cultural code' 'contains references out beyond the text...which evokes a pre-existing image in the reader's mind'.
Within the passage are various signs to suggest meaning.
Othello addressing his soul at the end of the first line is commonly found in the Bible and in many classic literary works.
In the context of the play, this might suggest that Othello regards the murder of his wife as something sacrificial and divine, not simply an act of revenge.
Indeed, later in the scene he confirms this when addressing Desdemona: "...what I intend to do / A murder, which I thought a sacrifice."
Taking a structuralist view of the text as part of a larger cultural body reveals more about Shakespeare's protagonist.
Barthes's fourth code is 'The semic code', 'also called the connotative code', which is 'linked to theme' and 'constitutes a character'.
This line of structuralism, taking into consideration the abundant binary polarities within the passage can generate clear meaning.
However, when in line three, Othello expresses a desire not to 'shed her blood' this reading does not give one solid singular meaning, but evokes varying meanings.
It is possible to read that the tragic hero is trying to avoid later guilt for his actions and thus does not want to leave behind him evidence of the murder.
Some critics, however, have argued that it is a sign that he wishes her to remain as she is; perhaps even wanting her to live.
Indeed, in the following line he speaks in admiration of her skin, which is whiter than snow, and later in the monologue reinforces this love when he requests Desdemona to: 'Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee, / And love thee after.'
In studying the binary opposites through the cultural code in the following lines, a structuralist analysis can reaffirm meaning.
The previous lines of love, and life, precede images of death.
The modal verb used in the sub-clause, 'and I will kill thee' indicates Othello's determination still to kill Desdemona.
The reference to the 'monumental alabaster' creates an image associated with death.
Shakespeare's words refer to a funeral monument, which A.J.
Honigmann suggests would be 'where effigies often lie on their backs, heads resting on a stone 'pillow', hands pressed together in prayer'.
He supports this also by referring to the candle carried by Othello which also suggests the ''church' tableau' and sees the imagery used by Shakespeare as a possible hint to how the scene might be staged.
Moreover, the use of 'alabaster', a translucent, white stone used for tombs, as a 'cultural code' reinforces this image of death.
A structuralist reading, considering the genre of the play allows us, also, to question the motives expressed by the protagonist.
The monologue expresses private torment concerning the hero and his relationships, thus it is questionable that he cares about what happens to other men.
This private theme in tragedy inevitably ends with death and indeed Othello remains intent on murdering Desdemona.
The use of the imperative verb in line seven demonstrates this.
However, the reference to her as a 'light' suggests that he considers her still to be fair and very much alive.
Once again, the text is working on binary opposites in order to create this sense of confusion and anguish.
The structuralist approach to texts will recognise that the larger body of the play works on binary opposites not only in theme, but in the language used by Othello.
A.C. Bradley considers that "... Othello is, in one sense of the word, by far the most romantic figure among Shakespeare's heroes."
In the duration of the play there is much evidence of this.
The language used by Othello is rich and poetic.
However, at times when he is passionately tormented, this fluid, sensitive language is lost.
In this monologue in the final act of the play, his language seems to suggest that he is, in a sense, returned to his former self.
This is illustrated by the insertion of phrases such as 'monumental alabaster' ; 'flaming minister'  and later, 'Promethean heat...relume' , which 'are notable for the high content of Romance  vocabulary.
This 'measured formality' is reflective of Othello's conviction that what he is about to do is a justified sacrifice.
Throughout the rest of the passage, the binary polarities become more poignant and by analysing them structurally it is possible to detect a change of mood.
In the lines eleven to fifteen, Othello continues to refer to Desdemona as a thing of beauty.
He addresses her as 'Thou cunning'st pattern of excelling nature' and compares her to a 'rose'.
These expressions, which suggest life, precede images of death.
The metaphor of the 'rose' which 'must wither ) is noticeably more subtle than those previous.
The mood is one which is of a softer, less passionate nature and evokes in the reader a sympathy that perhaps was not so strong earlier in the monologue.
This is aided by the way in which the reflexive verb phrase, 'I repent me', is used.
This evokes a sense of regret and guilt.
A structuralist reading through Barthes's cultural and symbolic codes reveals how this opposition of life and death is reinforced by the negative use of life images.
This is evident in the use of the phrase 'Promethean heat', on which Folger writes: Othello claims that he 'know[s] not where' this life giving source is 'That can thy light relume'; Shakespeare is using imagery of life in order to illustrate how completely dead Desdemona will be.
He does this again in line fourteen where Othello asserts that he 'cannot give it vital growth again', referring to the metaphoric image of the rose.
Othello's extended use of metaphor can again be understood as him reassuring himself that he is acting out of justice.
In the act of 'symbolising his wife' he continues to 'avoid confronting his deed head on."
A structuralist understanding of this use of metaphor in creating binary opposites gives us vital signs as to how the tragic hero should perhaps be understood.
The final lines embody the binary opposites used throughout this poignant and dramatic speech, showing fully how Othello can be understood as a tragic hero.
The monologue demonstrates the private theme essential to tragedy, illustrating his inner torment.
The structure of these end lines gives a sense of finality by summarising these polarities within two lines: The delicate placing of this emotional opposition solidifies our impression of how Othello is feeling and prepares us for the nature of the following scene.
Analysing the text from a structuralist theoretical stance allows us to grasp a clear sense of meaning from the text on several levels.
The concentration on genre, particularly since Othello is a tragedy, makes it possible to understand the passage through the various rules of tragedy.
The attention given to the passage as part of a larger structural body - a play - also gives a greater sense of meaning to the lines.
The most useful structural techniques in reading this text were the observation of binary opposites and the employment of Barthes's five codes.
However, structuralism seems to limit, perhaps, our psychological understanding of character; Othello is a private tragedy and the psyches of its characters are extremely poignant.
August Bebel stated in his works that 'there can be no emancipation of humanity without the social independence and equality of the sexes'.
This prediction suggests that there is a distinction between the two sexes or, in relation to social categories, between gender and their associated gender roles.
'A biological given sex  is used as the basis for constructing a social category that we call gender ."
By means of this definition and the definition of gender roles as 'a set of behavioural requirements [...] that are prescribed for a society's members depending on their sex', this essay will analyse how The Good Soldier by Ford Madox Ford and Mrs Dalloway by Virginia Woolf explore the construction of gender and gender roles.
Furthermore it will examine whether these books offer two different perceptions of this topic, since The Good Soldier was written by a man around the beginning of the First World War whereas Mrs Dalloway was written by a woman after the war.
Naturally, one may assume that they construct gender and gender roles in different ways.
Although this can be analysed according to their use of language, this essay will mainly focus on the images and themes used in the novels, such as the women's suffrage movement, homosexuality, marriage, professional status and education, as well as the presentation of different main male and female characters, with whom the construction of gender and gender roles is explored.
Both novels offer interesting male and female characters who clearly construct their gender and associated gender roles through their behaviour towards each other and the role they play in society.
The Good Soldier presents two couples, the Americans John and Florence Dowell, and their English friends, Edward and Leonora Ashburnham.
By means of his depiction of the main characters, Ford gives an insight into his understanding of gender at the beginning of the twentieth century, which may be related to his personal experiences, especially to that of marriage.
His representation of gender is not conventional with regard to Leonora's and, even more so, Florence's personalities.
Neither of the women show a characteristic obedience to their husbands.
With their marriages, in Leonora's case one arranged by her parents, they gained a certain position in society and therefore achieved an independence of sorts.
For example, when her husband has affairs with other women, Leonora also takes a lover.
She even organised Maisie Maidan's trip from India to their residence in Bad Nauheim where she 'wanted [her] for an adulteress' for her husband.
Florence Dowell, as the second main female character, 'takes numerous lovers behind her locked door', in particular Edward Ashburnham and Jimmy.
This open demonstration of women having affairs as men do seems to be a striking understanding of their gender.
These women can do the same things as men.
Edward 'believed in the virtue, tenderness and moral support of women', but he has to find out that the gender roles have changed and that women may also suppress men.
Leonora, who is renowned for 'her coldness' and, perhaps more markedly, Nancy Rufford 'desired to see Edward suffer [and] gave him hell'.
According to Ford, cited in Haslam, Edward Ashburnham represents 'the polygamous desires that underlie all men'.
Taking this statement by the author into consideration, one may assume that it is normal for men to have extra-marital affairs and that this is therefore one role related to this sex.
Furthermore, being strong may also been seen as a part of this role, whereas Edward On the one hand, he is rather weak - a stereotypically feminine trait - which can be seen when he is destroyed by women and finally commits suicide.
On the other hand however, he represents typical roles associated with masculinity - he is 'an excellent magistrate, a first rate soldier, [and] one of the best landlords'.
The character of John Dowell is, in relation to gender and gender roles, interesting.
John assumes that Edward 'regarded [him] not so much as a man [, but that he] had to be regarded as a woman or a solicitor'.
The Good Soldier therefore offers a new perception of gender where the roles of man and woman might have been changed.
According to Weininger's text Sex and Character cited in Haslam, Ford provides 'examples of differently mixed proportions of masculinity and femininity: all four protagonists manifest a singular [...] combination' in the novel.
Virginia Woolf's novel Mrs Dalloway Clarissa Dalloway is the most interesting character in this book.
Her walk through London, from which she has to retreat into her bedroom 'feeling [...] shrivelled, [and] aged', reveals a vulnerable and weak personality.
Not knowing if she has made the right decisions in the past, she thereby also confesses difficulties with her gender identity.
Her marriage is not really happy, although she can always put her trust in her husband's loyalty towards her.
According to Virginia Woolf, cited in Bradbury, 'all human relations have shifted - those between [...] husbands and wives, parents and children'.
Although the relationship between Clarissa and her husband seems quite traditional, with the important exception of her homosexual feelings towards other women, this change in gender roles becomes obvious in her relationship with her daughter Elizabeth.
Whereas Clarissa is undertaking the 'traditionally feminine project of giving a party [and thereby] constructing social harmony', her daughter reveals, by thinking about her future, that they stand for two different times with changed perceptions of gender.
In contrast to Clarissa Dalloway, Lady Bruton 'is split between the masculine and feminine world' by 'being more interested in politics than people [and by] talking like a man'.
She even accuses other women, and especially Clarissa, of getting 'in their husbands' way' and thereby preventing them from fulfilling their role in society.
Richard Dalloway and Hugh Whitbread represent typical male roles and characters.
The only things that Mrs Dalloway tells the reader about them is that they work for the public and support their wives.
Richard Dalloway once shows some sentimental feelings towards his wife when he brings to mind 'that it was a miracle that he should have married' her.
Whereas Richard wants to express his feelings by saying "I love you", which he is ultimately unable to do; 'male authority, partially incarnate in the relentless chiming of Big Ben, is more ominously embodied in the Doctors Holmes and Bradshaw'.
Peter Walsh, with 'the manners and breeding of an English gentleman', adds another layer to this gender.
His walk through London leads him to the centres of power, which are linked with masculinity, and therefore gives him an aura of strength.
During this gendered walk he even starts stalking a young woman which gives him the feeling of being 'an adventurer [...], a romantic buccaneer'.
His role in life is characterised by his love for women, and especially by his love for Clarissa Dalloway, who says that 'he was a man.
But not the sort of man one had to respect'.
In contrast to the other male characters who represent strength and power, attributes which are generally associated with this gender, Septimus Warren Smith embodies a weak one.
Parallels between the personality of Clarissa and Septimus intensify this effect.
Once Septimus was a typical male, who 'was one of the first to volunteer' for the First World War.
This 'developed [his] manliness', but it finally destroyed him.
Therefore a change in his character can be recognized after the war.
The Great War not only had an effect on him, but also on society as a whole.
As an aftermath of the war, the perception of gender and gender roles changed, as Virginia Woolf 'indicates [in Mrs Dalloway] the masculine tenor of postwar society.
The youngest generation in this novel is almost, and boastfully, male'.
As Bebel predicted in 1904, the 'education [of the woman of the future] is the same as that of man [in which] she chooses her occupation on such field as corresponds with her wishes [...] and natural abilities'.
This alternation of generations becomes obvious in Mrs Dalloway, since Clarissa Dalloway has no profession and only received a 'few twigs of knowledge [from] Fräulein Daniels', whereas her daughter assumes that 'she might be a doctor [or that] she might be a farmer' and therefore will 'play some active role in masculine society'.
In this statement made by Elizabeth, Virginia Woolf reveals that a change in the understanding of gender and gender roles had taken place towards more social and intellectual liberty.
The new generation has possibilities that were out of reach for the older generation.
All of the main female characters in both Mrs Dalloway and The Good Soldier have no professions.
They hold parties, travel, enjoy their lives and support their husbands, with the exception of poor Miss Kilman in Mrs Dalloway who has to work hard for her living, teaching history to Elizabeth.
In contrast to the other rather rich female characters, such as Clarissa Dalloway, who is described as a woman that 'did nothing, believed nothing', Miss Kilman, as a poor woman, seems to be the only one who has a 'degree' and is therefore 'frightfully clever'.
This accentuation of one gender with no profession and education, in contrast to Miss Kilman and the new generation, which is made obvious in Mrs Dalloway, can be explained by Virginia Woolf's own experience of being disadvantaged by 'not being formally educated, as her brothers had been as a matter of course'.
All of the men in Mrs Dalloway have, or in the case of Peter Walsh, have had a profession which assured them of some success and status in society.
In literature about The Good Soldier all 'protagonists [,regardless of being male or female,] are [generally described as] not clever' and 'essentially uncultured'.
Whereas the gender role related to one's profession and the education of men in Mrs Dalloway is mainly a role intended to support a family, a wife or the country, this is not clear in The Good Soldier.
This may be due to the fact that the book, in general, describes the relationship between two married couples with no connection to the outside world and that both couples are quite 'wealthy', especially John Dowell.
Concerning gender and profession The Good Soldier is remarkable.
Although the reader is generally kept in the dark about the education of the main protagonists, only knowing that Edward Ashburnham is a former captain by profession, which is typically male, the female characters seem to be better educated than the male.
This is a rather new portrayal, since men are normally regarded as the better educated sex.
Leonora is described 'as being remarkably well educated', whilst Florence is 'engaged in educating Captain Ashburnham'.
However, during the novel neither of the four protagonists has an actual job and therefore constructs a specific gender role.
Speaking generally, the gender roles in the books vary greatly, since they offer a different perspective on society.
Whereas The Good Soldier is associated more with private life, Mrs Dalloway constructs different gender roles by comparing private life with public social life as well as contrasting two generations.
Elizabeth's dream about a future profession goes together with 'a change of some sort [that] had undoubtedly taken place' in the perception of gender which is pointed out by Peter Walsh when he remarks, after coming back from India, that the new generation of women is wearing make-up and enjoying their time and that they 'would marry when it suit[s]' them.
Although the women's suffrage movement is only mentioned in Mrs Dalloway and not in The Good Soldier, it plays an important role in constructing gender and gender roles.
Bebel specified women 'as the sex that [...] has been oppressed, and ruled, and defiled by man [and explained that they therefore have an interest] in removing such a state of things'.
He expressed this idea in 1904, at the beginning of the twentieth century, a time of intense suffragette activities.
As a result of this movement and the work of Sylvia Pankhurst, by the year '1918 all married women over thirty who were on the local government electoral register were granted to vote'.
'Legislation in favour of women's rights continued throughout the 1920s and 1930s [and achieved that] all women over twenty one were allowed to vote [by 1928]'.
Although the women in Mrs Dalloway are not really oppressed or ruled by men, they reveal a dependency of sorts on their husbands or upon men in general.
The disadvantages of the female sex provoked Sally Seton's denouncement of Hugh as having 'represented all that was most detestable in British middle-class life [and that] she considered him responsible for the state of those poor girls in Piccadilly'.
The distinction between gender led to this argument about women's rights, during which she explicitly stated 'that women should have votes'.
The occurrence of this women's suffrage movement theme can be explained with reference to Virginia Woolf's biography.
Woolf herself joined the movement in 1910.
With the use of this theme, the existing differences between gender during that time are highlighted.
The movement fought for a change in the restricted gender roles of women and the consequential results were 'changes in law [which] were both causes and effects of altered ideas about domestic gender roles'.
Aspects of homosexuality appear in Mrs Dalloway as well as in The Good Soldier in which they construct a certain perception of gender.
However, this theme is again stronger in Virginia Woolf than it is in Ford Madox Ford, due to the fact that 'Virginia's preference for her own sex had been a fact of her life since childhood'.
Her own relationships with women had an effect on her life and her writing.
In her books the 'life-stories of women and the friendships between them are always set against the limitations of heterosexual and marital relationships'.
In Mrs Dalloway these homoerotic tendencies occur in the characters of Clarissa Dalloway, Miss Kilman and Septimus Warren Smith.
Clarissa definitely admired Sally Seton and the reader may have the impression that she would have had a real relationship with her, instead of marrying Richard, if homosexuality had not been illegal at that time.
'This question of love [...], this falling in love with women.
[...] Had not that, after all, been love?"
Clarissa is not sure about her feelings towards women, and especially towards Sally, since she knows that loving a woman is not what is been expected of her - to marry a man and to fulfil her role as a wife is.
However, she confesses that 'she could not take her eyes off Sally'.
Being kissed by Sally increased her confusion about her feelings even more.
In addition to Clarissa, a second female character of Mrs Dalloway shows rudimentary homosexual traits.
For Miss Kilman, Elizabeth is 'so beautiful!
[that] she genuinely loved' her.
She wishes that 'she could grasp her, [...] could clasp her, [and] could make her hers absolutely and for ever and then die'.
This is not as explicit as the kiss between Clarissa and Sally Seton, but it reveals that two women in Mrs Dalloway see their gender differently.
A third protagonist, Septimus Warren Smith, highlights homosexual feelings between two men in the book.
Septimus's past as a soldier and his occupation as a clerk reveal traditional gender roles as well as his feelings for Evans, the officer who had shown him 'affection', show an unusual understanding of masculinity.
In his lively dreams about the dead Evans, connections to Greek words and songs are made.
According to Linda Dowling, cited in Bradshaw's introduction to Mrs Dalloway, 'the love that dare not speak its name could be spoken of [...] as paiderastia, Greek love' before homosexuality was legalised.
This term Greek love was used by authors such as Oscar Wilde 'as a code for homosexuality'.
One might also infer a 'homosexual element' in The Good Soldier in the character of John Dowell.
Throughout the book, Dowell's narration reveals how much he adores Edward Ashburnham for what he has done for other people and society.
He describes him as 'a fellow that many men liked', but in particular he himself.
'I like him so much - so infinitely much."
For John Dowell, Edward Ashburnham is the perfect representation of masculinity, a 'straight, upright and honourable' man.
Whereas Dowell at the beginning and throughout The Good Soldier only confesses that he likes Edward, he finally declares that 'I can't conceal from myself the fact that I loved Edward Ashburnham'.
Although the reader cannot really find any evidence of more than a strong friendship between Dowell and Ashburnham in The Good Soldier, there is a homoerotic element to John Dowell's thoughts about, and admiration for, Edward Ashburnham.
With this introduction of homosexuality to the texts, both authors reveal that gender is not easy to define and that the traditional roles and the understanding of gender may be in a state of change.
After analysing The Good Soldier and Mrs Dalloway insofar as their perception of male and female characters is concerned, one can conclude that they construct gender as well as certain gender roles.
As this essay has pointed out, the way of doing this is different in Virginia Woolf's work to that of Ford Madox Ford's novel.
The images and themes used by the authors vary or appear at a different level of intensity.
Of course, the authors are referring to their own experiences concerning gender and gender roles.
Therefore, the fact that one book was written by a man, whereas the other one was written by a woman may have had an influence.
Where Ford offers a rather negative perception of women, who were the cause of Edward's destruction, Woolf portrays women in conflict with society.
As the war demanded certain gender roles, the perception of gender might also have changed in Mrs Dalloway in contrast to The Good Soldier, a book which was written beforehand.
Although The Good Soldier pushes acceptable public boundaries, the presentation of gender and gender roles is more obvious and definitely stronger in Mrs Dalloway.
However, since 'the modern period is a period of profound and marked changes in the social structure and in the psychic structures of men', both authors use certain descriptions of love, affairs, relationships and married life as well as generation differences in order to construct their ideas of gender.
Beside the main characters, the minor ones, such as Nancy Rufford, as well as other characters in Mrs Dalloway and The Good Soldier, offer interesting perceptions and in general also contribute to the construction of gender and gender roles, but due to limitations of space they could only be briefly mentioned.
I have elected to compare Linda France's poem and Agard's 'Listen Mr Oxford Don' as they display a contrast in register and code.
The first is written in Standard English, whereas Agard uses colloquial spellings and language to question and challenge what is defined as Standard English.
Recurrent music analogies foreground the importance of rhythm in France's poem.
Amalgamating differing syllabic lengths generates an air of unpredictability and excitement that capture the poet's initially optimistic attitude towards love.
The innate reverberation within fricative /z/ phonemes, echo throughout the first stanza in order to produce a highly animate impression of restlessness and exhilaration.
This atmospheric buoyancy is fortified by polysyllabic neologisms such as; 'razzamatazz,' which incorporate a deliberate novelty in order to convey her hopeful anticipation.
The dynamic verb 'dazzled,' creates the impression of a blinding gleam that illustrates how her aspirations prevent her from seeing the banal reality of love.
The poem exposes the divergence between idealism and actuality by using structural parallelism to establish a familiar configuration that is suddenly disrupted by the sixth stanza.
It operates through a series of metaphors where the first five stanzas follow a strict pattern; each is comprised of three lines beginning; 'If love was,' with the second line commencing 'I.'
The form then disintegrates into two-lines, changing the poem's rhythm in order to mirror the poet's shift in viewpoint.
This enables the reader to share her surprise and confusion as the poem, like love, refuses to conform to an established expectation.
The volatility connoted to 'flame,' suggests a craving for danger and metaphoric desire to burn with love.
The verb 'melt' in the simile; 'I'd melt in its brassy flame/ like wax,' conveys her yearning to submit to an overwhelming force; to become flexible and elastic like jazz, free from control and direction.
Enjambment fortifies this by creating a sense of inexorable continuation.
'I'd feel its slow/ slide,' utilizes the sound symbolism of alliterative repeated fricative sibilant /s/ sounds and liquid /l/'s to create an impression of surrender, as the tongue coils around the word in a languid, sensual manner.
This reinforces the image of liquefying and succumbing to the influence of a powerful force such as love or music.
Structural deviation occurs in the eighth stanza where end-stopping is suddenly employed.
This creates a staccato rhythm that jars with the previous fluidity, foregrounding the change to a more cold and realistic tone and attitude; 'But love isn't jazz./ It's an organ recital.'
When juxtaposed against the poem's electrifying depiction of jazz, the recital appears dull and conventional.
The poetic form fortifies this impression; culminating in quatrains and adopting a more traditional 'abcb' rhyme scheme can be read as demonstrative of the predictable, routine reality of love.
Incorporating an additional line may be indicative of the poet's augmented wisdom but 'Eminently worthy,' drips with a cynicism that suggests they would rather revert to their previous naive optimism.
'If love was jazz,/ I'd always want more,' lays bare her disillusioned abandonment of fantasist ideals, leaving the reader with an impression of jaded loneliness that stems from her apparent exclusion from the excitement and hedonism found on the; 'smoky dance-floor.'
Agard also employs differing verse lengths, but here they represent the multiplicity of English language varieties.
Substituting 'I' with the stereotypically Caribbean colloquialism 'Me,' in; 'Me not no Oxford don,' uses grammatical deviation to compose a new type of syntactic structure that accurately captures Agard's unique accent and culture.
Afro-Caribbean register such as; 'de', 'dem' and 'ent' when coupled with Creole dialect forces the reader adopt a different voice, as certain phonetic spellings alter pronunciation.
'mih,' forces emphasis on the aspirate /h/ to create a breathy, drawn-out sound that elongates elocution, allowing Agard to autographically inscribe his voice in the poem.
The ellipsis of certain expected prepositions such as 'to' in; 'dem want me serve time,' enables him to realistically impart his sociolect.
Manifold first person pronouns such as 'me' and 'I,' generate a confident, unapologetic and defiant tone that foregrounds the thematic centrality of manifesting one's identity in an authentic and unimpeded manner.
Integrating Creolised idiolect and Standard English implies a sense of conflict that reflects Agard's battle to prove his language is equal and valuable.
Contrastive opposites such as the contrary status of 'don' and 'immigrant,' uses a perceived lesser counterpart to demonstrate society's tendency to look down on non-standard forms of English.
This impression is fortified by the repeated juxtaposition of 'Oxford',  against the multicultural, ramshackle associations connoted to 'Clapham Common.'
Allusions to violent armaments such as 'gun' and 'knife,' reflects the threat that many feel immigrants pose to British language and nationality.
Language is essentially vulnerable; amalgamating differing rhyme schemes such as couplets and half rhymes helps capture its fluid instability.
By manipulating language and making it his own, Agard is seen to violate English; 'mugging de Queen's English/ is the story of my life.'
But, dismantling and reconstructing language enables those outside the dominant discourse to articulate their 'story' with credibility and authenticity.
Language is depicted as an evolutionary medium.
'I don't need no hammer/ to mash up yu grammar,' utilizes the active verb 'mash' to demonstrate how vital linguistic assimilation and variation is, as without change, language cannot advance.
Agard attempts to prove this is something positive to embrace and not be threatened by; 'I only armed wit mih human breath.'
He needs no weapons, as language itself is more influential than violence.
Being made to adopt Standard English allows Agard to identify with those who feel their language is in danger, making irony a powerful tool in the poem.
The word 'armed' suggests that he too feels his language and individuality is under threat and in need of protection.
'I ent serving no jail sentence/ I slashing suffixes in self-defence,' uses enjambment to highlight the importance of being able to speak in a free and unconstrained voice, suggesting that you become imprisoned when denied the ability to express yourself.
The opening impression of determination and resistance that pervades the poem, is fortified by the powerful force of coupling re-current dental plosive /t/ sounds with bi-label plosive /b/ and /p/ phonemes in; 'I bashing future wit present tense.'
The proliferation of monosyllabic words in sentences such as; 'I'm a man on de run,' drive the poem's aggressive, adamant beat by generating a pounding rhythm.
Active, dynamic verbs in the concluding stanza capture the energy of his rebellion against enforced colonial discourse, while using the progressive present tense emphasizes the poem's insistence on advancement.